Online casino gambling bill,
and, uh, I understand we've got New Zealand Thoroughbred
Racing and Jill.
Yes, that's correct. Thank
You. You'll be great.
Great, great. Good morning. Thank you.
We've got 10 minutes for your submission, so you're welcome.
I'll, I'll keep it a note of the time.
Yeah, you're welcome to use as much of that as possible.
I'll leave some time for questions as well,
And you've read the submission? Yes.
Yeah, thank you. Yeah, we've got a copy
of them and we've Great.
Had a chance to have a look at them. Thank you.
Um, so just briefly, thanks for the opportunity, uh,
jewel Gregory, I'm the head of Legal
and compliance at New Zealand Thoroughbred Racing.
Um, uh, our, our submission, I'm not going to read it,
it sets out in detail our, uh, response to the bill.
Just in summary, you know, racing is a significant, uh,
contributor to the New Zealand economy.
Um, and it's built around,
around communities providing employment.
Um, and it, and to note it's not,
it doesn't receive government funding.
It's, it's sort of sits aside to sport.
It, it is a sport, but it, it, it's self-funded,
self-sustained through wagering.
Um, but the evidence shows
that the racing industry has been in decline
and it's been given a lifeline
through the strategic partnership with, um,
between TAB New Zealand
and in New Zealand's thorough racings view.
This is the time to, uh, to innovate, to diversify,
to ensure the long-term sustainability
of the racing industry.
Uh, and that really underpins
the submission that we've made.
And like many other submitters, it is
that we ask the select committee to ensure
our meaningful share of profits back
to New Zealand communities, to sport and to racing.
There is a number of different mechanisms
that you could use, uh, to, to achieve that outcome.
Uh, and the one that we have, um,
really touched on in the submission is
to provide an opportunity for racing, uh, as a combination
of, of thoroughbred racing
and harness racing to together be, uh, entitled
to a license under the legislation prior to opening up to a,
uh, a corporate, commercial, um, auction regime.
Uh, and that would first
and foremost provide us with a diversified revenue stream
to continue to grow
our industry for the good of New Zealand.
Uh, and it allows us to have some self-determination on
how we could continue to grow.
Um, we have, and we have worked closely with TAB New Zealand
and understanding their desire also to, to have a license
while our sort of first
and foremost position is that we would, um, advocate
for a license to be shared between the racing codes.
Um, if the select committee was minded to
provide the opportunity for TAB
and Z to have a license to allow it to, uh,
distribute revenue back into sport
and racing, uh, that would be supported as well.
So really, I, I would just like to take this opportunity
to really answer questions that you do have of me,
and I'll leave the submission as, as read.
Thank you very much, um, for your submission.
I'm really, I'll just maybe ask an initial question
of colleagues, um, questions I can indicate
I'm quite interested in the idea of that you're proposing
around the priority of licenses being given to, uh,
the groups that you've outlined with, um,
what I think is Lotto Sport New Zealand and racing.
Yeah. And so is that, um, so are you imagining
that you would, um,
or those groups would be able to have some kind of, uh,
online gambling operation as part of their suite of,
'cause I think we've heard, I i, I can't recall.
Um, and that that might, this might be my memory
that when we've heard from the other organizations
that they've kind of indicated that,
but is this something that's like a collaborative
Proposal? No, it's, um, I mean,
I guess in writing our submission,
we weren't necessarily aware of
what the other submitters were,
were thinking we'd had some initial conversations with some,
um, groups, and I, I did note
to say some from the lotto position
that they really wanna protect their own
regime, which is fine.
Um, but they're not, it doesn't appear
that they're interested in sort of moving into a, a more,
um, uh, significant online gaming or casino operation.
Mm-hmm. Um, so what what we would imagine is
that either the T-A-B-N-Z
or the racing industry would work with a, uh,
a recognized sort of, um, approved provider, right.
Sort of a white label version of it's online casino, um,
and then have a, a revenue share model, which would ensure
that those profits would return back to sport
and racing. I'm just checking
If colleagues have, um, questions. Uh, lemon.
Mm-hmm. Thanks for your submission
and thanks for coming along today.
Um, I wanted to ask you a question just separate from your
previous, um, cord, just around, um, so
you've highlighted initial phase
and then the second phase for opening up overseas.
Do you have a view on how many licenses
and what about the domicile in New Zealand around work?
Um, look, I haven't done a lot of research.
I've heard a lot of people discuss sort of five
or six licenses as a potential,
and I think that re ref reflects the number of
potentially New Zealand resident organizations operations
that are already in the market ready to go to market,
perhaps choosing not to enter a gray market at the moment.
Um, the, the concept that we put forward was to, you know,
this is a significant change to regulation of,
of the online casino space that, um,
potentially rushing to 15 licenses, uh,
with a broad scale sort of marketing campaigns,
international, um, operators,
potentially risks some harm occurring.
And that, uh, having a staged introduction to the licenses,
uh, first of all, prioritizes New Zealand,
the returning revenue and profit to New Zealanders,
but also allowing some time to bet in a regime to see
what works, what doesn't work,
and then potentially at a second stage opening that up
to an auction process, um, for overseas operators.
Thank you. And so just quick set, um, yeah.
Um, it's about that tiered sister, so whatever the number
of online license, but that New Zealand gets the first buy.
Correct. And, and our,
and I guess the number of our submission is that the,
the bill should assign some licenses
to not-for-profits first, to really to, to identify
that the, the, the, I guess the foundation of New Zealand's,
uh, gambling and wagering rules are
around supporting New Zealanders, um,
supporting funds back into, to community spo into racing.
So prioritizing that in the legislation.
Then sort of secondly to New Zealand, you know,
commercial operators and then finally to overseas operators.
Thank you. Thank you.
Mostly, ah, thank you for your submission.
I'm just, uh, curious as to, uh, how much, uh, thought
that has actually been in terms of your idea of potential,
um, I suppose, um, profit sharing idea
with, uh, potential online, um, gambling
organization together with TAB.
What do you, how do you actually see that working,
particularly since I'm guessing New Zealand thoroughbred
racing hasn't really been in any kind
of gambling operations?
Uh, well, not gambling per se, obviously, um,
betting on races is, uh, the foundation of wagering and,
and what you might say is gambling in New Zealand.
Um, we haven't had those conversations in detail.
Um, TAB New Zealand, uh,
obviously currently has a strategic wagering partner, which,
uh, in who is a, a, you know,
a resident New Zealand business now, who has proven, uh,
as selected by government to be that wagering partner.
Uh, they have significant experience overseas,
operating online casinos.
They would be a natural partner for TAB New Zealand
and the racing industry.
Uh, but we haven't got any further in terms of discussing
what those details might be.
What do you hope that that could potentially, uh, return
to the, uh, thoroughbred racing?
Um, our goal, uh, within,
or our strategic, uh, priority is
to diversify our wagering income and,
and have 40%
of our revenue coming from non wagering sources.
So our, uh, you know, if we look in, in broad figures,
around $200 million, uh, comes in.
So if we could get a hundred million per annum, uh,
or slightly less coming through, uh,
an alternate revenue stream that would bolster our,
our online, our long-term sustainability wasn't
The deal between TAB and Tain.
The very reason, um, that's the very reason why the, um, um,
merger has actually happened with, um, tain and TAB,
So that that's underpinning the racing industry.
Yes, yes. Um, and, and TAB New Zealand.
Uh, but the reality is that even with Entine
as a strategic partner, that the wagering in New Zealand
continues to decline.
And whilst we are doing what we can to turn
that round the racing industry, if it wants to,
to have a long-term future, it is up to us
to diversify our revenue streams to look at
where else we can support our owners, trainers, jockeys, uh,
to, to make sure they have long term careers
and sustainability in the industry.
Thank you so much, Jill. We have run out of time now.
Got lots of questions for you, um, today,
and thank you for your engagement today
and for being our first submitter at our
Auckland hearings. Thank
You very Much. Thank you so
much. You, I'd now like
to welcome the Asian Legal Network.
So I've got Aria and Reen, is that right?
Thanks very much for your written submission.
We've all, um, got a copy of
that so you can take that as read.
And we've got 10 minutes to hear from you
today, so over to you. Thank you.
Cool. Kiara. Um, we are Reen and Aria,
and we're submitting on behalf of Asian Legal Network.
We are an organization of lawyers, former judges,
researchers, and community advocates.
As part of our work, we like to make submissions
to people in charge, like you on
how potential legislation will have an impact
on Asian communities.
To that end, uh, we strongly oppose the passage
of the online casino gambling bill in its current form.
We take our submission as read,
but we want to focus on two main points today.
First, the disproportionate impact this bill has on Asian
communities, and second, the recommendations that we have,
which would prioritize harm reduction
for vulnerable communities.
Firstly, in our view, this bill increases access to gambling
by permitting up to 15 licensed online casinos, ino.
Unlike physical casinos,
online ones can be accessed anytime, anywhere,
and even in private by licensing
and regulating online casino.
This bill gives gambling a sense of legal legitimacy
and even social acceptance in our communities.
This has a disproportionate impact on Asian communities
who are 9.5 times more susceptible to gambling addiction.
Secondly, this bill does not have
sufficient advertising controls.
We are concerned that operators will use promotions
to target vulnerable populations,
including Asian communities.
For example, the use of loyalty schemes
or even cashback offers, could have the effect
of transforming someone who gambles infrequently to someone
with a gambling addiction.
This is because ads in our mind glamorize gambling
and increased participation, especially
among vulner vulnerable groups such as Asian peoples.
Third, we do not consider this Bill aligns with its purpose
to facilitate a safer
and compliant regulated online casino gambling market.
As touched on by New Zealand therapy bred racing,
this bill will create a competition
for new the New Zealand market to compete
with overseas markets.
However, this could result in heightened gambling
experiences, which exacerbate gambling
addiction in New Zealand.
For instance, New Zealand operators may be looking to gamify
or personalize online gambling experiences here in order
to entice individual users.
Collectively, this bill exponentially increases the risk
of addictive gambling in Asian communities
through increasing exposure to online gambling,
normalizing online gambling through advertising
and enhancing the gambling experience
for individuals across our tedo.
I'll now leave it to Aria
to consider some recommendations that we may have.
Sharon, so following on from those submissions,
the key point that I would like
to draw out today is the idea of harm reduction
and a factor
that we consider should be prioritized in
the design of the bill.
And we don't consider
that the bill in its current form has shown
that it has given adequate consideration
to reducing the harm of online gambling in our communities.
So our recommendations, um, are to amend the bill in a way
that addresses this concern.
I'll, we will take our written submission as read,
but just to briefly summarize, some
of these recommendations include, um, to include a duty
to ensure that operators consider vulnerable communities
and, uh, linguistically diverse communities In part three
of the bill, which already talks about duties
and requirements on operators.
So this duty is particularly relevant for harm minimization,
consumer protection, and also if, um,
and when there are complaints, the complaints process
and other recommendations such as, um, to address
the impact on vulnerable communities specifically
and embed that into the language of the statute,
to amend the bill
to explicitly require inclusive consultation
and co-design of these regulations.
And by that we mean to talk to community groups, talk
to the people who will actually be affected
by these online casinos
and take their concerns into
consideration when designing this statute
and the legislation
and other recommendations that we support,
including those made by Asian Family Services.
Um, specifically the following recommendations such
as maintain the status quo
of banning online gambling advertising,
and, um, that will involve the amendment of Clause 10,
and also setting a minimum casino age to age 20.
Um, so that kind of is the key point that we want to Dr.
Drought today in our oral submissions.
And we do want to say that we are just concerned
that the bill will increase usage of online gambling
and disproportionately affect our communities,
so Asian communities in particular,
who face a high risk of problem gambling.
Um, I will now conclude this part of our oral submissions
and turn it over to you guys for questioning. Thank
You so much. Um,
I'll, yeah,
I've got a question then I'll go, go to Melissa.
I, I was interested in the statistic
that you mentioned in your oral submission.
I note that it's in your written submission as well,
and it comes from the, um, a report in 2021 on
what is harmful gambling.
I haven't read that report. Um,
but thank you for bringing it to our attention.
I'll endeavor to have a look at that.
Um, does it provide any context as
to why it's such a high rate, um,
that Asian New Zealanders are, uh, uh,
that we are seeing are more susceptible to online gambling?
Um, so gambling addiction from our understanding is
often multifactorial.
So a lot of issues such as, um, being new immigrants
to a country, um, not having proper support systems
or perhaps like cultural phenomenons as not being able
to talk about mental health struggles openly
and not being able to address addiction openly, et cetera,
can all be factors that impact communities, um,
and make these communities more vulnerable
to gambling addiction.
And also the provision
of support services is often inaccessible to communities
that are linguistically diverse as well.
So kind of our understanding as
to why our communities face these additional struggles when
it comes to problematic gambling behavior. Thank
You. Melissa,
do you know if there's actually stats in terms
of the Asian population's gambling issue?
Um, um, uh, physical gambling places versus online gambling?
Um, as in the statistics,
Yes, because apparently, um, we actually have, uh,
black market, um, online gambling, uh, places
where people are actually gambling, which is not regulated.
And this bill is PO trying to regulate, uh, that market so
that it actually becomes not black market. Mm.
And we totally understand that,
and we are glad you bring up that point.
So, to clarify, our position is
that we definitely support regulation of online gambling.
Yes, I know. I heard that that is an issue that is current
and we support that.
However, in the process of bringing this black market into,
you know, onto the table for us to regulate it,
these regulation measures in our opinion, need
to prioritize harm reduction,
which we just don't really see.
Yeah. The stats that you
provided was actually for physical, um, um, gambling issues
that we currently have, which is, which can be measured.
Mm-hmm. What I'm saying is that do you have any kind
of stats in New Zealand for online gambling,
which currently already exist that Asian people have problem
with compared to the physical one?
I don't think we have any statistics. Okay.
Currently, one hand,
and I suppose that is one of the issues
with having black market gambling,
there's very little visibility.
Yeah. But I would also like to point out that, um,
through our preparation for the submission, a lot
of the research that we have shown, um, doesn't address
or target our vulnerable com communities as much
as we would like to see.
So that is also an issue, like the understanding
of the breadth of the problems that our communities face,
the reasons as to why our communities face these issues,
that is also one of our concerns,
but as a broader concern outside of perhaps the remit
of the submission.
Thank you. Thank you. Final quick question.
Thank you. Thanks for touching on the advertising ban,
but also consultation question I wanted
to ask was the age limit 20?
Mm-hmm. So, as you probably know, land-based casinos,
you can't go into them physically unless you're 20.
Mm-hmm. This is the bill actually proposes 18,
but you are saying to lift it to 20.
Yes. You just wanna unpack that a little bit.
Yes. Um, I suppose we, we don't really see a reason
to lower the age limit for online gambling.
It makes more sense to keep it consistent, um,
with the current status quo.
And there are some parts of the status quo
that we would like to see maintained in the bill.
For example, banning the online advertising
and also, um, imposing a higher age limit,
which is also consistent with many overseas jurisdiction.
Actually, as far as we know, there are some jurisdictions
where the age limit is 21, I believe.
Thank you. Thank you so much.
We've run out of time now,
but thank you so much for being here with us today
and for your written submission
and for your, um, insightful answers
to our questions. Thank you. Thank
You. Thank you guys so much.
Thank you. We now have the New Zealand
American Football Federation.
Russell, welcome. Thank you.
Thank you very much for being here.
I think you've, you know the drill
now, um, from being in the room.
We've got 10 minutes. Um,
and if you wanna leave time for questions,
we do have a coffee every and submission here.
Thank You. That we had a look at. Thank
You. Thanks for the opportunity
to speak today.
As you know, I represent New Zealand American football
with 24 affiliated clubs across the country.
But I also want to speak on behalf
of the many community organizations
who rely on grant funding to survive.
We receive no funding from Sport New Zealand, so we are, um,
our funding comes from the tain agreement or TAB agreement.
So what we've seen is some members
of parliament have suggested there's no proof
that online casino gambling will reduce community funding,
but absence of evidence is not evidence of absence.
It doesn't take very much to go
and find the research from the
Australian National University.
That clearly shows that as gambling moves online revenue
shifts away from traditional community linked class four
style operators
and community benefits are reduced.
We already see that pattern here.
With a lotto and TAB moving online under this bill,
casinos will not be required to return any portion
of their profits to the community.
That gives them a major competitive
business advantage over existing Class four operators
with 24 by seven access, direct marketing,
big sign up incentives.
Gamblers will naturally be drawn online.
Class four operators will lose revenue.
And with it, the funds that currently flow
to sport charities
and cultural groups, existing Class four
operators will apply for licenses.
It will be no surprise then that they'll see the advantage
of going online where they don't have to carve off a portion
of their profit, move to a simpler,
more profitable model.
You can easily take from there to a reduction in the number
of venues that are available,
because why would you want to go
to a more complicated model when there's a simpler model,
less venues, less funding pool?
Quite simple. We've also seen a narrative
that the clubs are too dependent on, um, on grants,
but that misses the point.
People who run these societies are good people who,
who give up their time
and their energy for the benefit of their communities.
Many of these groups would simply fold without
access to community funding.
Our clubs are not managed, uh, sorry, are managed
by unpaid people with a passion for the sport.
Often, I know this two jobs
active in their church, running the club
and coaching the teams.
It is disingenuous
and cynical to suggest they're too reliant on grant funding.
The alternative for these clubs should this happen, is
to raise membership fees,
effectively another tax at a time when the cost
of living is already high.
That reduces access, especially
for young people in those in disadvantaged communities.
For decades, there's been bipartisan agreement
that gambling must benefit communities.
That's written into the purpose
of the Gambling Act Act 2003.
This bill has a potential to break that contract
by creating a pathway where potentially profits flow
offshore, and there's no obligation to return anything
to the communities who be the social costs.
But let's think about what happens if the,
the bill passes in its current form
and the online casinos do take revenue from the existing
pokey venues
and funding to community organizations
is significantly affected.
What will be the reaction from the 40 community
organizations in the Tamaki electorate?
What will be the reaction across the country?
We support the online gambling casino bill
and the regulation, but if the bill passes in its current
form, will divert funding away from grassroots sports,
cultural groups and social services at risk,
dismantling the very network of community organizations
that hold New Zealand together, very tough
economic environment, it's naive
to think the bill in its current form not have a negative
impact on community funding.
I urge you to amend the bill so that consistent
with the gambling act, a share
of online casino revenue is guaranteed for community benefit
and distributed fairly big or a small sport
or non-sport just as it's done now through class four.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. We've got
a question from Melissa Lee.
Uh, thank you. You mentioned the, uh, transition
for lotto going online.
What kind of impact has that actually had on the funding
for the, um, uh, communities sporting organizations?
Well, we don't get any funding from lotto, so I'm not sure
what the answer to that question is.
Um, I had a question.
Thank you for bringing to our attention the 20, uh,
19 social return on investment, uh,
work done by Sport New Zealand.
I think this is a point that hasn't really been, um,
delved into much by the committee thus far.
And that's the return that sport gives.
Um, obviously we've heard of a lot of, a lot of the kind
of social benefits, but that report
that you've highlighted shows
that they're also economic benefits to sport.
I just wondered, wondered if you wanted
to talk about that a little bit more?
'cause we haven't really
Absolutely. I mean,
sport, um,
obviously passionate about sport.
Yes. And, and any sport, to be honest.
Um, in a lot of cases, that's the fence at the top
of the cliff for a lot of people and a lot of societies.
Um, I can't speak enough about the benefit,
especially of team sport, lessons for life,
friendships for life.
The, the resilience you get through losing mostly,
but, you know, winnings, winnings there as well.
But all those lessons are vital
for youth growing up.
Gives them access to role models.
There's so many benefits,
but I don't want to take away from some of the work
that's done by some of the other social groups as well.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah. Thank you for that. Um,
I'm not sure if we've got any other questions,
but just also we've been really interested to hear,
I think we heard from another American football, um,
submitter, um, on it online as well.
And it is something I had no idea was, um,
We've Proven so much in New Zealand,
so it's been really interesting to learn about that. Yeah.
We've, we've grown threefold in the last six years. Wow.
Basically off the back of a non, uh,
contact version of the sport.
Yeah. It's really, which
Is now in the Olympics in LA so,
Right. Okay.
So it's been a journey. Yeah,
Absolutely. Well, thank you for all the work that
you do,
and thanks for coming in today.
You're welcome. Really appreciate it. Thank you. Thank you.
Our next submitter is
Hitted, is that right?
That's right. Thanks. Thank you.
Um, and we've got Jamie here with us, is that correct?
Yes. Thanks. Uh, Jamie Privilege Fitch. Uh, yeah, welcome.
Thank you Koto.
And, and thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
I've come here wearing two hats.
As someone with several years in gymnastics governance
for a small rural club in ti.
And as the founder of a woman led sports enterprise
advocating for women in sports economics
and, uh, commercial opportunities,
this bill is an opportunity to recognize that equity
isn't about treating all sports the same.
It's about understanding their different realities
and ensuring legislation doesn't
deepen existing inequalities.
To do this, I present a case study from gymnastics
and the specific club I was in
and, um, president of, uh,
grants from gambling proceeds helped cover operating
expenses like rent and wages, safety critical equipment,
and coach development at one
regional gymnastics club alone.
Rent over 20 year period totaled close
to half a million dollars.
And with 60% of that cost in just the last five years,
that's a good indication of, uh, the rate
of inflation and above.
Gymnastics is a sport, also a sport
with limited commercial revenue
and disproportionate local government
and investment and facilities.
And that's really relevant when you look at the overall big
picture of funding,
understanding those alternative funding streams, uh,
to grants from granting proceeds
and the specific, specific differences.
Now, in 2023, sport New Zealand, uh,
published their future funding think piece,
which shows sources that fuel the New Zealand sports system,
which is a really good base
model of their sources.
They estimated that 58% for funding fuel
came from central and local government.
9% from gambling proceeds 23% from membership fees
and 10% from philanthropic commercial.
So that difference between the national picture
and individual sports codes will vary.
The sports that have equal distribution across these
quadrants are what we can call prosperous.
The system works for them.
This framework is great for allowing us
to see disparities across those sports
'cause it's not the real reality for
my regional gymnastics club featured in the case study.
So central and local government, opposed to the 58%,
the national picture was just 9% funding
over a 60 year period.
Gambling proceeds 4% philanthropic and commercial 7%.
And this is where the picture gets really, uh, pertinent
to this legislation.
So where government is estimated
to cover more than half the system
for gymnastics at barely registers, instead
that gap is shifted directly onto families
membership fees cover a staggering 89% or costs,
and they carry almost the entire burden.
And when families are already struggling with the cost
of living this over-reliance, risk pricing, kids,
and most especially girls out of this sport altogether
as disproportionately reliant on parents
and the goodwill of foreign volunteers.
So gymnastics isn't just unfounded,
this represents distinct gender funding gaps for women
and girls, as it is, it is not a sustainable model.
And here's the problem. If the bill proceeds without
re amendment, it will create a funding shock.
Yes. Without a legislated community return,
all grassroots sports losers out.
However, with sports, with without the big sponsors
or broadcast rights, it's a bruise for sports that
with no broadcast revenue, limited brand sponsorships,
less investment in infrastructure over reliance on
membership fees, a high proportion of female workforce
and already overstretch volunteers, it's a fracture.
Equity means recognizing
that not all sports start from the same place,
and without this lens, the bill
as it is will hit codes like gymnastics far harder than
those with commercial safety nets.
I presented in, uh, my submission international examples
that could show us a better way,
and these are models that we can learn from.
I'm not going to deep dive into them
because that's, uh, quite a big piece
of work you can imagine.
So I'm gonna go straight to my recommendations.
First, embed the principle already in the gambling act.
Gambling should benefit the community, uh,
create a statutory online gambling levee
earmark for community sport.
Third, there needs
to be a consideration if this isn't adopted,
because there will be damage to mitigate.
I feel like establishing a transition
and equity fund to prioritize sports, uh, without those, uh,
other commercial or sponsorship income safety nets
would be advisable, uh,
as is supporting all co codes
to build alternative revenue streams.
We're in an age of AI now, which is going to be one
of the most, uh, transformative
and consequential technologies of our time.
There's gotta be something there
around investment platforms and innovation.
Uh, the gentleman
before me talked about the social return on investment.
Absolutely. We need more research on this
because the return on sport is not just metals, it's health
and wellbeing and social cohesion.
The first three I've just mentioned will inform smarter
commercial and philanthropic investment.
Let's legislate to ensure gambling continues
to benefit our communities
and build a ferret more resilient
sport system for the future.
Thank you.
Thank you very much for your submission.
Um, I was gonna ask you about international stuff,
but I appreciate that as, um, thank you for raising those
and, and we can, um, get some more information on that.
But in your recommendations,
you talk about disadvantaged codes,
and I know that I understand about, um, the,
the gender point about funding
that you made around gymnastics.
But is there, can, can you give me kind of a general picture
of what other codes you think would fit into that category?
Yeah, I, I think going back to
that future funding think piece that Sport New Zealand did,
uh, the quadrants that they have around where the funding,
um, streams come from, uh, it's looking at other codes that,
and what their, their individual picture looks like.
So off the top of my head, you know, it would be, um, uh,
high those codes with a high proportion of female membership
because typically they don't get, uh, as much funding, uh,
the codes that aren't filled
or, um, caught, uh, that's, that, that don't, um,
get as much funding as the others.
So I, that's why I raised that
as a really good base model for analysis.
You can map the individual codes across that really easily.
Mm. Okay. Thank you so much for that.
I don't think we have any other questions,
but thank you very much for your
submission and for coming in today. Thank
You very much. Thank
You.
Yes, thank you.
Our next, uh, submitter is gymnastics New Zealand.
I up.
I might let you, um, introduce yourselves,
but you've, you've seen the drill, um, 10 minutes for, uh,
submissions and if you wanna leave time for questions,
you may over to you.
Thank you. And we've got a bit of a gymnastics theme.
I think our next presenter also has a
connection, which is fantastic.
And you'll see we're all women wa
and that tells you a lot about our sport.
So, Uh, my name is Andrea
and I'm the CEO of Gymnastics New Zealand.
I'm speaking on behalf of our organization
and also our 90 affiliated clubs
representing 45,000 members, around 200,000 people
who didn't do gymnastics regularly.
A thousand coaches and thousands of volunteers across.
I have with me today Marin from Harwick Gymnastics
and Deb from North Harbor Gymnastics
because I thought having a national body talking about local
impact made no sense.
So, uh, thought I'd bring the community to you also
a little bit about us, which Jamie touched on,
but gymnastics is a foundation sport.
It teaches the fundamental movement skills
that help people's, uh,
excel in all physical sport in the future.
Balance, coordination, strength, spatial awareness.
We talk about gymnastics being the first sport
for New Zealanders because we believe whether you stay in
our sport or move on, it sets you up for life.
85% of our members are under the age of 12,
and a similar percentage are women or girls.
So as the National Sporting Organization, we are responsible
for leading sport, uh, to ensure that our clubs are able
to thrive and our community get those experiences.
As Jamie said, we are a community sport.
Without the commercial revenue from broadcast
regular major events,
we are heavily reliant on our membership fees
and grants to fund us.
As you would've seen in my submission last year, we,
the National Sporting Organization received 10%
of our budget and grants
and many other years it's been much, much higher.
And these funds aren't discretionary, they're foundational.
They support our national championships,
which are on right now.
Actually, I've taken a break to talk to you.
National, um, coach development
and inclusion programs, our regional relationship managers
who work directly with clubs.
Without them, we would either have to increase our fees
or reduce our services, which are already very tight.
Gymnastics is a uniquely high overhead sport.
Our club network requires specialist equipment,
qualified coaches, and safe indoor venues.
You don't want your kids doing
flips if they don't know what they're doing.
The costs are significant
and for many clubs, gaming revenue is the only way
they can stay afloat.
So if access to gaming revenue is reduced,
as it would be should this bill pass in its current form,
we estimate up to half
of our clubs would become financially unsustainable.
That's not just a number I've thrown out.
We've run the numbers based on recent financial reporting,
and that would not just be a loss for gymnastics,
it's a loss for community wellbeing, youth development,
equity for girls and women in sport,
and in fact, for young athletes who go on
to take up all the other codes.
I'm sure you'll hear from during this time, I've asked Marin
and Deb to join us to give their perspective.
Uh, Marin, do you want to kick off? Sure.
Uh, Kiara, my name's Marin Greenho.
I'm a representative of Hawick Gymnastics Club.
Um, I used to be a gymnast and coach myself, uh,
and now I'm a parent of two gymnasts
and I volunteer my time on the board.
Um, Howick Gym Club offers programs that supports kids
of all ages and ability levels, uh, including schools
and children with special needs.
Uh, and in addition to physical development,
gymnastics is brilliant for helping kids develop confidence,
resilience, uh, and perseverance.
Um, from my own experience, the sport has set me up
with critical life skills,
and it's really important to see my children do the same.
Um, as Andrea's noted,
gymnastics is a high overhead sport requiring
among other things specialized equipment and facilities.
Um, Howick Gym Club has been working towards a specialized
venue since I was a gymnast 25 years ago.
Uh, and without, uh, the 10 to $20 million funding required
for a custom built facility, uh, we have
to operate in rented commercial space.
Um, our rent went up 21%.
Um, this year alone, increases on
that scale cannot be absorbed by member fees.
Our families are stretched.
Um, in recent years, how at Gym Club has received grants of
between 15 and $45,000 a year,
and we've had to apply those to rent relief
and to operational expenses in addition to, um,
capital expenditure.
Um, our club needs this grant funding.
Uh, we have to balance keeping our fees at a level families
can afford with ensuring our membership numbers are high
enough, uh, to remain sustainable.
If our grant funding's cut off, um, we wouldn't be able
to afford upgrades to facilities and equipment,
but also, uh, we'd have to raise fees to a point where many
of our more vulnerable, uh,
families wouldn't be able to continue.
Uh, and if we can't, um, keep a balance,
then the club would be at risk of closing.
Uh, and the closest clubs are at
least 20 minutes drive away.
Uh, so most of our thousand members, um, for
how a gym club would not continue in the sport,
including my two boys.
Um, grant funding's critical. Uh, it's a lifeline.
If you don't hold online gambling organizations
to the same standards as their, uh, brick
and mortar establishments, you risk the loss
of organizations like ours.
Thanks.
Thanks, Andrea and Miran. I'm Debra Reed.
I represent the largest gymnastics club in Australasia in
based in New Zealand North Harbor Gymnastics.
I'm here to show you exactly
what losing gaming revenue means at club level.
At North Harbor Gymnastics,
we serve 3000 members plus schools, specialized,
diverse needs, programs, dance schools,
and holiday programs.
This equates to around 6,000 individuals from our city,
benefiting from our club every week.
Over the past four years, we've averaged
around $66,000 annually from gaming trusts.
This is an optional funding. This is Financial Lifeline.
Without it, we face impossible choices,
dramatically increased fees for families already stretched,
or are programs that serve our
or cut our programs that serve our most vulnerable athletes.
Gaming revenue funds, our specialist equipment,
our qualified coaches, and our fit for purpose venues.
As Andrea noted, these are high over
ethnicities, not luxuries.
Our gaming funded programs make these life-changing benefits
accessible every child, regardless of family income.
We also employ 160 staff, one third being under 18
and 80% being female with the first employment, um,
gaining their first employment
through our Coaching pathways.
Our inclusion program also serves special needs athletes
and low income families, these very groups that,
that this community cha this, this committee champion
for e equity in sport.
But here's the policy contradiction.
The bulk creates online casino gambling without the
community's benefit obligation
that sustain us land-based gaming operations contribute
to our communities under the Gaming Act.
2003 online operators would contribute nothing.
Andrea outlined that the sport wide crisis
of the sport wide crisis,
I'm showing you the club level solution,
embed the gaming at 2000 three's.
Community benefit principle into this bill
require online casino operators to contribute
to community support funding,
protecting the investment model
that develop our young people.
Thank you for this opportunity.
So you can see why we wanted you
to hear directly from the people on the coalface.
In summary, as you note in our, um, in our submission,
and I'm sure everyone else will be telling you from our
sector, we don't disagree with the bill,
but we believe that the bill should follow the established
practice of gambling in New Zealand, which is
to invest into communities.
And with that lost, you'll be seeing a huge
impact across the country. Thank you.
Thank you. Thanks for your submission.
It was great to have the, the
team approach here today as well.
Very probably similar to gymnastics, uh,
and, um, amazing contribution that you make
to the community as well.
So thank you for doing that. I just had a question around,
I know you said, um, that you'd done some digging into the,
um, in your Russian submission when you said the half the
clubs may become financially unstable.
Um, and when I looked at that,
'cause it was only 10% of funding, I thought, oh, that's,
um, unusual when it's only a small amount of percent, uh,
you know, uh, not the majority of the funding.
But is that because the funding in the past was you said,
well, that was also much higher.
Yeah. So what level was that previous?
Um, kind of grant funding that Yeah,
Tricky, tricky to answer.
The 10% relates to gymnastics New Zealand,
so not to our community.
I think that percentage varies Massively because,
and it is a challenge with the current system.
If you're an area with a gaming thunder that does fund sport
and community, then those clubs see
a much higher percentages.
So some, in some clubs it's much, much higher.
In some clubs, it's much, much lower.
The overall picture is that in the increased, um,
cost of living, the increased funding, all
of our clubs are seeing their, um, reserves dwindle.
Um, many, many, many, many
of our clubs are in financial crisis.
Um, we support every way we can.
So that 50% figure was based on clubs
that wouldn't have the reserves space to, um, sustain a,
a significant funding change.
Thank you. I think we've, um, good. Yeah. Well good.
Thank you so much. Thank you very much for being
with us today, and thanks for the work that you do.
And, um, yeah, I think most most parents experience would be
that they had kids through
gymnastics, although went on to other things.
So I think that's a really good point to raise.
Do I declare a conflict that I did gymnastics at? Uh, yeah.
So did I. Thank you very much. You so much.
Thank you. Our next submitters are New Zealand Cricket.
Welcome.
My name is Scott Win Inc.
And I'm the CEO of New Zealand Cricket.
I also have my colleagues Glenn Critchley
and Richard Bach with me this morning.
Thank you very much for taking the time to hear us.
Um, I'll just make a short statement about New Zealand
cricket, then I'll, I'll read a pre-prepared statement
for the benefit of the record, and then, um, myself
and my colleagues are happy
to answer any questions that you might have.
Um, New Zealand Cricket, uh, looks
after cricket from community right through
to Pathways and high performance.
Our vision is to be New Zealand's favorite game,
so we're unashamedly going after rugby in that respect.
Hopefully they're listening to this.
Um, but more importantly, our purpose is to be a game
for all and a game for life.
Um, and so we, our game tries to reach to all parts of, uh,
the New Zealand community.
We want children to fall in love with the game at the age
of five and stay in love
with the game right throughout their life.
Um, we have cricket starting at under five, going right
through to over 70 these days.
Um, so it truly is a, a, you know, a game for all.
Um, and Class four community funding is a, is a key part
of funding our game, and in particular, the community game.
I'm speaking on behalf of New Zealand Cricket
and as part of a community collective representing 46
national sporting organizations
and 18 regional sports trusts.
NZC supports regulating online gambling to reduce harm
as intended by the gambling Act 2003.
However, the online gambling bills exclusion
of the community funding principle breaks the social
contract on which gam on which legal gambling in this
country is based, that a proportion
of proceeds are directed back into the community
to offset the harm caused by gambling.
Mr. Van Valdon claims, there is no evidence
that legalizing online gambling will reduce Class
four pokey funding.
However, with respect, we think this is misleading.
New Zealand lets evidence only
because online gambling remains unregulated overseas,
where it's legal, the impact is clear.
In Australia, online gambling grew to 40% of the market.
By 2024 Haling slot revenues
here, class four profits found 23% in real terms from
2021 to 2025.
N-Z-I-E-R predicts a $43 million drop in sports grants
within five years.
And all the while the 800 million
online gambling market grows at 18% annually.
Gambling is a controlled activity for a reason.
The gambling Act 2003 essentially charges community groups
with a responsibility of clearing up the mess caused
by gambling's insidious and damaging effects.
For the minister to represent this as a dependency
or bickering over pro profits is,
is disappointing from our perspective.
I just want to repeat the gambling act specifically
because we know gambling is harmful
and damages our FAU reinvesting a proportion
of gambling proceeds back into the community allows groups
such as Cricket clubs to help repair the harm
we know is being caused.
The intent of that is the intent of the current law.
That's why in twenty twenty four, a hundred eighty 6 million
of Class four gambling proceeds were channeled
to a community sport sustaining 1.6 million club members
and 1 million volunteers.
The minister needs to know these
volunteers aren't profiteers.
They're givers delivering two, $2
and 12 cents in social value per dollar spend
and helping achieve the community good
that come current gambling tasks them with
by favoring offshore operators who face no community levy
and can advertise freely.
Unlike Class four trusts,
the bill lets profits flow overseas while our communities
are degraded due to gambling harm.
New Zealand Cricket and the collective urge you
to amend the bill to mandate a Class four style community
funding levy and flexible distribution mechanism
to ensure online gambling upholds the gambling act ethos.
Thank you very much. We welcome
any questions that you might have.
Thank you. Um, thanks for your submission
and for your, you know, your powerful statements.
I, I think from your written submission, um, the,
and I I guess your oral submission as well, the bit
that really stood out for me is,
is you looking into the evidence of reduction in, um,
in grant funding due to the transfer of online gambling.
And I noticed that you said that you've already noticed, um,
that online, um, gambling
as it already exists in an unregulated space
is, is having an impact.
And I just wondered if you wanted to,
to provide any more information on that, just
how it's already having an impact.
Do you wanna speak to that? Um,
Can you just repeat the question?
Oh, sorry. Just in the, um, in your written submission,
um, you said the increasing drift away from on location
gambling towards online wagering is already causing
financial challenges for cricket.
And so I just, um, I appreciate the comments around, um,
the very useful overseas experience.
Um, and that I think was the nz IER report.
Um, but I just wanted to know the,
The, The finance, the,
the impact we're already having really. Yeah,
Just in, in, in terms of class four, four, um,
profits falling 23%
and, uh, real terms between 21, 20, 21
and 2025.
Um, clubs
and community groups are already under pressure from
dwindling, uh, class four of gambling.
Um, as we, we, we, um,
as we see the trend, uh, transferring to online, um, uh,
unregulated right now,
but everything overseas, um, tracks as, uh,
as being something that will continue, um, to continue
to degrade, uh, onsite gambling funding.
Yeah, so I mean, essentially at the moment, uh,
the new New Zealand cricket community is funded, um,
to an amount of up to $11 million from Class four funding.
And as Richard said, we've already seen a reduction on that
of 23% on the back of, um, gambling,
moving from pokies to online.
Mm-hmm. So there's been a real impact already.
No idea. It was so, um, noticeable already. Yeah.
Anyone else? Questions? Yeah, Melissa,
it's a huge difference, uh, between the funding that
Cricket gets versus gymnastics.
You wanna share some with gymnastics?
Sorry, joking, joking.
Uh, yes, being slightly facetious.
Um, you actually talked about the, um, the transition, um,
to online gambling has actually meant that the funding
that class four, um, funding of sports has actually reduced.
Do you think that is, have you actually done an analysis of
where the money from class four is actually being
distributed to, or is it just a guesstimate
or have you actually seen the numbers
and, uh, their profits are actually low?
So class four, within a, within a cricket context,
the funding is, is is, there are clear
and deliverable KPIs that it's attached
to within the cricket community.
So we can track that very clearly
as to where the funding goes.
So every, every dollar that comes
to into the New Zealand Cricket community from class four
funding can be linked very clearly to community cricket.
Uh, the question isn't about, uh, New Zealand cricket,
the question, you made a statement saying
that the online gambling, uh,
has impacted on the class four funding distribution
to sports and, uh, community.
What I'm saying is that, have you looked at how the, uh,
class four profits are
and how they're distributing in terms of
where they're distributing?
Uh, or is it just, you know, uh, uh, I'm trying
to understand how you can actually make
that statement if you haven't actually analyzed
how they're distribute and what's been distributed.
Well, we, we were applying, sorry, to, uh, the, uh,
statement by the minister that there's no evidence
that legalizing on the online gambling will reduce Class IV
poke funding.
And we do think this is misleading
because all the evidence overseas, uh, uh,
uh, predicts that this will will continue to happen.
And, uh, we're already noticing a, uh,
a drop off in class four profits, um, in onsite
Gambling. Yeah.
Thank you. Uh, Laga,
Just a, um, quick question on your, uh,
written submission about the move to, in the bill 15 online,
um, licenses will be offered.
Did you wanna just unpack that a bit more?
Sorry, what You pose, did they
Pose it the move to you, you just responding
to the bill in terms of the move to 15 on
and the impact of that?
Do you have a view on a number if the bill was
to go forward in terms of the current 15 versus Well,
We, we would like to see it increased to, you know,
more than 40%.
We think, you know, the funding that comes through gambling,
um, should be increased to community and sport
because of the impact that gambling has on that group
and the work that that group does to try
and, uh, relieve that impact.
Um, so it should be at least 40% as far as we are concerned.
Ideally, it would be increased
'cause it is going to the right places in the community.
That's the percentage of gambling profits, right? Yes.
Yeah. Okay. Yes. Thank you. Thanks.
Um, I think we've actually run out of time now,
but thank you so much, um, for joining us today
and thanks for the, the work you do in the community
and also, um,
for answering our questions. Appreciate it. Thank you.
Thank you for your time. Appreciate that.
Thank you. Thank you.
We are just running a couple of minutes ahead,
but we do have, um, uh,
our next submitters Louise Perkins Foundation
or Sweet Louise
welcome.
Got, um, 10 minutes for your submission.
You would've seen the other submitters, so you're welcome
to use all that time or leave some time
for questions over to you.
Thank you. So Koto
and thank you, um, for the opportunity to speak today
for Catherine Towa.
My name is Catherine Devold, I'm the CEO
and here representing Louise Perkins Foundation, who trade
as sweet Louise.
I want to start by making it clear that we are not opposed
to regulating online gambling.
And in fact, we agree that strong regulation
is indeed needed to reduce harm.
Um, but we are deeply concerned that the bill,
as it currently stands, creates a two tier system
that is inconsistent
with the New Zealand's existing 20 2003 gambling law,
and it risks leaving thousands of charities
and the communities that we serve without vital funding.
So Sweet Louise is a national charity.
We provide practical, emotional, social support
to New Zealanders with incurable breast
cancer at the end of life.
We enable 'em to live as well as possible for
as long as possible.
And we do this through providing direct funding
that we fundraise partly through gaining trusts, um,
directly to patients and their families.
So we have currently more than 800, uh, women
and men that we support,
but there's a huge ripple effect, um, in terms of
that support to their children, their partners parents,
and generally the wider whanau
who also feel a positive difference.
Um, we provide direct funding for transport to ensure
that these people can continue their medical treatment
for supermarket vouchers so that they can continue
to put healthy food on the table.
And also counseling peer support, um,
and our memory making experiences, um,
that will live on way beyond the life of our patients.
None of this would be possible if we weren't able to access,
uh, gifts and community funding.
And we are only one of a thousand,
more than a thousand charities, as you've already heard, um,
that are in this similar position
that would have a negative effect.
Um, should this bill proceed?
So we have two main concerns, firstly, that the bill, um,
creates a two-tier system under the current law.
Anyone who operates Class four gambling must return at least
40% of the proceeds back to the community.
And the principle is clearly set out in the gambling
Act 2003.
Um, this proposed bill does not require any online
operators to do the same.
So offshore companies would be able
to operate in New Zealand, profiting from New Zealanders,
but with contributing nothing back to the communities,
um, that we serve.
So it creates an, an evil playing field, um,
and undermines the very principles of, of fairness
of our country's laws.
Um, secondly, the funding shortfalls.
Now Sweet Louise receives 12%
of our annual income from gaming trusts.
And if this were at risk, um, we would be cutting staff,
leaving families at poverty,
or making them make the choice of either going
to a medical treatment or put in food on the family For the
kids, it's not a position
or a judgment that anybody really wants to, to make.
Um, the risks are also coming at a time
where community fundraising
and funding is already extremely fragile due
to continuous increases in the cost of living
and the uncertainty in the economic environment.
The demand for our service is higher than ever.
Costs are increasing across the board.
Um, and at the same time, we are facing pressures to,
you know, keep our own admin
and operations as lean as we possibly can.
Um, gaming trust funding does help us to bridge the gap
and to keep our services professional and secure.
So removing, in removing
or weakening this funding stream in today's economic climate
really just is unsustainable for certainly us as a charity.
Uh, earlier this year we did experience a cyber attack
because we had prioritized putting our funding in directly
into patient support as we should.
Um, and it was only thanks then to a game in trust
that we were able to re-secure and get back on track
and recover from that incident.
So that experience really underscores
to us something vitally important that the,
this community funding, it's not a luxury.
It really is investing into quality, accountable,
secure charities and companies in this country.
Um, we are just one of thousands, as you've already heard
of community organizations, you know, wide diverse
of sports clubs, culture, school health providers,
and emergency services that would be impacted by this bill.
Um, so the impact of reducing that mandatory return, um,
was just gonna be felt countrywide.
And in the long term,
if the funding does disappear, um, through the bill,
the government will face the enormous gap, um, that
that creates to fill.
So without it, our essential community services
and charities would disappear
and people have to turn somewhere the welfare state,
um, to fill that void.
So it's not just a funding issue, it's social cohesion.
It's, um, a community groups really strengthen the fabric
of our society today.
And if we are weakened, um,
then the communities themselves are also weakened.
So we can choose, um, the opportunity Bill Amendment, um,
would allow, um, to provide, uh,
the mandatory community funding, um, to online
operators in the same way that those, um, onshore, um,
currently have to through the existing, um, gambling laws.
So one single rule to mandate every licensed operator online
or off to return a proportion
of their profits to community groups.
Um, it's fair and equitable
and in line with current gambling laws.
So to conclude, we are one of thousands, tens of thousands
of organizations that really do rely on this community
funding, um, provided through game interests.
Um, we support, uh, over 800 people directly,
but they're wider families with 12% of our income.
So there would be a direct cut, um, if that were at risk,
um, and that we feel strongly that this bill is creating an,
an equitable two tier system undermining existing
legislation and pulling risks, pulling hundreds of millions
of dollars of funding out of New Zealand communities.
So we would urge that the bill be amended to ensure
that any licensed online casino is required
to return a fair share of their proceeds
to New Zealand communities.
Um, which will demonstrate that we can regulate, um,
and balance both economic and activity
and community wellbeing. Thank you
So much. Thank
you. And we've got a question from Lamon.
Um, thank you. I wanted to acknowledge the work
that you do with those 800 families.
Um, obviously, uh, the social impact of that, if there was,
if the bill remained as it is, uh,
and just in your, in terms of the two tier system that you,
so my question is just around impacts for those families
if you do not receive that grant funding mm-hmm.
The impact of that and where could they be referred to?
Should the bill remain as is?
Uh, that's a very good question.
At the minute, the only place
that I guess we could refer back to would be
to places like winds.
And so we are then looking for them
to directly fund the transport,
put food on the table for these families.
Um, because the impact of their condition already, they have
to cut hours work to enable them to continue the treatments
that they need to sustain their lives.
Um, and there are very few organizations out there
that provide in direct money to them like we do.
Thank you. My last one is just
around the stakeholder consultation.
Mm-hmm. Um, because, uh,
this is one sector of the community.
'cause we've heard a lot from sporting
and they do valuable work in community.
So, um, it's important that you have the opportunity
to be able to cons speak, be consulted to give your view.
Absolutely. Yes. Um, I certainly think
that there are a number of charities out there who,
I mean I've spoken to who may not have been aware
and have come into the process late
because there was, you know,
such a tight timeframe on getting that submission in.
So to, you know, enable them the voice as well that we have,
um, is absolutely vital
'cause there will be other services impacted.
Thank you. Thank you for your work.
Thank you. Thanks. Run out of time
and thank you so much for your, um, submission and, um,
and your written submission
and just join, I think the all of us would, uh,
join the monger and thanking you
for the work that you do in the community.
Thanks. Thank you. Thank you.
Um, we now have Asian Family Services. Welcome.
Thank you. You are welcome to the community.
I'll let you introduce yourselves,
but we've got, um, two minutes for your submission
and you're welcome to use all of that time.
We'll leave some time for questions at the end
and we, we do have a copy of your written submission.
Thank you so much. Over to you. Thank
You. Um,
Kira Koto, I'm Niha. Namaste. Uh, an SAO kva.
Hello everyone. My name is C Fang, the CEO
of Asian Family Services.
Thank you for the opportunity to present our recommendation.
I'm joined today with my colleague from public health, um,
Hong National Public Health lead manager
and clinical team from Chinese, Indian
and Korean background who are here to support
and represent our communities.
As you know, the Asian population in
New Zealand is growing rapidly.
Today Asia makes up 17.3% of the population
by 2043.
That number is project to reach 26% nationwide.
In Auckland, almost 44% of the population will be Asian.
But alongside this growth, there is also vulnerabilities.
Gambling harm in Asian community goes far
beyond financial loss.
It affects mental health, family relationship,
and wellbeing of children.
Gambling harm is not just a number,
it is a serious public health issue
that this proportionately affect Our community.
Asian Family Services has been the sole national provider
of gambling harm minimization service
for Asian communities since 1998.
Every year we receive
around 10,000 phone calls for our helpline.
For a, from the Asian community seeking help.
We deliver 12,000 clinical intervention sessions
to individual family impacted by gambling harm.
We reach thousands
of more from our public health initiative.
We know the suffer in our communities.
We know how stigma, shame, language, cultural barriers
stop people from seeking help many remain silence,
hiding their pain.
That is why we here today to represent those unheard voices
to call on government to ensure
that legislation plays the prevention
of gambling harm at its heart.
Our position is clear.
We support the principle
of reg regulating online casino gambling here in
New Zealand, but we cannot support endorse this bill.
In the current form, we make clear
three key recommendations.
Prioritize how minimization online casino gambling
harm is inevitable.
The question is how we tighten the legislation
to provide safe net for our people.
Preventing is better than crisis intervention.
The bill, the bill must make harm prevention central,
not afterthought.
Second, ban all online gambling,
advertising, advertising face harm.
Vulnerable groups like Asian, Maori Pacific are at the risk
of this online casino if we cannot ban it.
All. The minimize gambling harm message has to go coexisting
whenever the ad is played.
Third, strengthening consumer protection regulation must be
robust, effective, and culturally appropriate.
Ensure meaningful consultation policies must be co-designed
with our community.
So protection meets the real needs.
Why this is a critical important, first of all, higher risk
among Asian Mara Pacific.
The government own strategy, confirm, compare with European
and other New Zealanders Asian group risk factor
is 9.5 times higher.
Marpac Pacific, six plus times more higher, second
higher online participation.
Our 2022 survey found 84.6%
of Asian under 65 engage in online gambling or gaming.
In the past 12 months, 32.6% played online casino.
Of those 90.9% were SkyCity customers
and over 70% use both scarcity and offshore side.
Third harm goes far beyond help seeking numbers.
Some has suggested harm is measured by
how many people seek help.
This is completely wrong.
The ministry's data shows 65,000 New Zealanders experiencing
moderate to severe harm, yet only 6,605.
Sick helps. This means 90% suffer in silence.
The service data does not reflect the true scale of harm.
False, the barriers and the stigma.
Language, fear for judgment, culture,
shame keep people hidden.
Many tells us feels more acceptable
to endure harm than seeking help and losing face.
Let me share one story.
A highly educated young professional in his thirties came
to us after gambling on the offshore online casino.
He had a well-paid job, a young family,
and a stable life in New Zealand.
But within a few months, he lost entire income,
including his savings, an argument with his wife.
And in the middle of divorcing,
he told us, I feel trapped.
There were no limit, no protections, no warnings.
I could keep deposing until I lose everything.
Now imagine the ripple effect of his children instead
of stable income home, leaving a environment
that are secrecy, financial stress, fear
of family breakdown.
Young people carry trauma into their teenager
years and adulthood.
Research shows that children grow up in the household
of gambling harm are more likely
to develop harm gambling patterns themself.
So the cycle continues.
One person's harm today become the foundation
of the another generation's harm tomorrow.
This is not an isolation case.
We hear stories like this far too often.
Unless the law change with a stronger protection
of minimized gambling harm,
we will keep hearing the case like this.
Gambling harm is not a limitation to adult.
It increased effect young people and children.
Online platform gaming features targeted advertising exposed
to our young people gambling like activities from the young
age, for example.
Many video games, including Lu Box gamifications
of gambling are normalized making gambling feel like
entertainment rather than gambling harm.
Young people are particularly vulnerable
because their brain are still developing imposed control.
Risk assessment are not fully matured.
Make them more chasing. Loss.
The accessibility of online gambling on their phone.
Social medias means gambling almost 24 7 in their pocket.
Many young people don't recognize early warning signs
of gambling, harm and stigma prevent them to speak up.
And you all know New Zealand has one
of the shame's highest number
of used suicide rates in OECD country.
Gambling harm is one of the key factors
that can contribute the worst in
young people's mental health.
This is why prevention must start early.
Preventing young people means ban or advertising
and preventing online operators from targeting our young
people, embedding culturally appropriate harm minimization
into this legislation.
If we fail to act, we risk creating a future
where gambling harm is not just today's crisis,
but tomorrow's inheritance for our young people.
Gambling harm is not just about money loss,
it's about home broken.
Trust shattered future stolen every problem,
gambling affect at least six people around them.
This means tens
of thousands New Zealand family are living in
the silence of crisis.
I wanna share a real, uh, voice recording from our, one
of the people from the community.
We are a member of Parliament and the officials in charge.
My name is Song and I live in Oakland.
I mean I'm immigrant 25 years ago from South Korea.
And for 20 years I struggled deeply
with the gambling addictions by gas grace
and the support of Asian family service.
I have been recovery for the first four years
in the Asian community, especially among Koreans.
There is a strong stick stigma toward gambling.
Many families, very great shame.
So people open hide their struggles instead of seeking help.
The silence makes the recovery even more difficult
and leaves many suffering alone.
If online casino, uh, officially legalize it,
gamble will be become more accessible
and more hidden, especially
for vulnerable people like immigrants who face stress,
language barriers, culture difference, and isolations.
Thank you. In conclusion,
Asian community face a higher risk
and high online participation, lower help seeking
and significant barriers.
The number we see are only tip of asberg.
This is why the bill must strengthening.
We urge committees to put a harm prevention at the center
ban or advertising guarantees.
Stronger protections require culturally appropriate
consultation without stronger protection,
gambling harm spread like a hidden pandemic.
Silent, unreported, but devastated waiting for families.
Legislation must treat gambling harm
as a public health emergency, not as afterthought.
Thank you.
Thank you so much for that.
And thank you for the powerful recording as well.
We have actually used, um, all of our time,
but I'll just check with my colleagues if there's
any urgent questions.
No, I think you covered that really well.
So thank you so much for coming in
and for your, um, very comprehensive written submission
and oral submission today.
Thank you. Thank you so much. Thank you.
Yeah. Uh, thanks everyone.
We now, um, will, uh, briefly adjourn
and start back again at 10:30 AM for our next submitter.
Thank you.
We do have a copy of your written submission.
I think you might have seen the, uh,
some of the other submitters.
So 10 minutes. Yep.
Um, leave time for questions if you wish over to you.
Absolutely. So, um, yeah, so yeah,
Ken Mapson, the CEO of Hockey New Zealand.
Um, firstly, thank you so much
for this opportunity to come and speak to you today.
I'll try and be quick to give a few minutes at least for us,
for any questions if there are, um, just look a bit
of an overview from Hockey New Zealand, we represent
active participants, which is part
of a much bigger community of parents, grandparents,
coach, coaches, officials.
So we're really speaking on their behalf today.
And we really strongly believe in the power of sport
and the value that it provides to communities.
You know, we, we really are a network
of social good organizations
that represent hockey across the country as a,
as our all sport and the contribution that we make
to people's mental and physical wellbeing.
And that community connection piece,
I think can't be understated in the value of, um, you know,
a New Zealand society today.
Um, we truly make New Zealand a better place.
Um, look, we strongly support the regulation
of online casinos and the intent of the bill,
but, um, we must advocate for there to be a community return
as part of that much has been ingrained in, um, you know,
through class four gaming and other forms of,
uh, gaming in New Zealand.
We believe that that's absolutely critical to, you know,
support community organizations
and minimize some of the harm that gambling does create.
Um, you know, hockey in 2024 as a collective
of 32 associations and many clubs
and schools received around $8 million in class,
full gaming in 2024.
And that is at risk.
And while we are not dependent on that money,
it absolutely is a key, um, revenue source
that enables our delivery to be accessible
to many communities across the country.
Um, we use it to get people active.
We lower entry costs with it
and we support people's developments.
You know, uh, hockey,
much like many community sports is delivered
by an army of volunteers.
And that funding really helps support those people both in
their development through such coaches and officials
and administrators, but also by delivering, um,
community outreach programs, national events and the likes.
Um, and without this funding, um, well without that funding
or the minimization of that funding, we will,
we really will have to make some hard decisions around,
you know, making our sport less accessible, um,
reducing services or being dependent on other,
on other forms of revenue.
Um, so yeah, really that's where we stand.
Like I say, just our, our position is
that absolutely support the regulation of online casinos,
but that we believe there needs
to be a community return much
as is enshrined in the other forms
of legislation. Thank you.
Thank you so much for your submission.
Um, one of the things that stood out
for me in your written submission was the comment
that you made around the 17% inflation
and just a decline in class four since 2019.
And I just wondered, um, if there,
so I'm just kind of wanting you to expand on that a wee bit.
Do you, do you think there's a link there
with the rise in online gambling?
Is with it, with it being unregulated at the moment
or do you think there's kind of a number of factors
that might contribute to that, that decline?
Um, I suspect there are a number of factors,
but undoubtedly that is one of them.
You know, the, with the rise of online gambling,
I think there, there is research that shows that, you know,
as a, um, as the, you know, online gambling increases, the,
the class four gaming decreases and
therefore that community return,
if it's not enshrined in the online gambling will be impact,
you know, will be impacted.
Like I say, we received as a collective of sports, uh,
hockey organizations around $8 million in funding in 2024.
Um, and we have no doubt that that will decrease, um,
if online gambling is doesn't return a community, um,
you know, that there isn't a community return.
Yeah. Okay. Thank, thank you very much for that.
Um, Luongo, did you, I just have, um, in terms of hockey,
how's, um, what is participation like
and what has it been in recent times?
Is it, is it something that's growing in New Zealand
or is it remaining stagnant, declining?
Yeah, good question. So we have about
80,000 players, dual gender.
Um, we're probably the,
we're the biggest truly dual gender sport across the country
have been since we, you know, since the sport came about.
Um, um, up
and down the country, it's played kind of every,
in every nook and cranny I guess, of the country
and the pop, um, participation is growing, you know, it's,
uh, it's a hard slog.
Um, there's no doubt about that,
but we're, we're not declining.
We're absolutely are continuing to grow
and we're seeing growth across a whole range of our sport,
particularly masters, which, um,
honorable Melissa League came
and presented at our Masters World Cup last year, um,
that we hosted at Albany.
And, you know, that event alone, um, injected $18 million
of economic benefit to the New Zealand community.
And so while we didn't receive class four gaming for
that specific event, because it was an international event,
it is the power of our sport of having that community base
that allows us to do those sorts of things.
Um, and so yeah, hockey is, is really, um, thriving
and going very well across the country,
but this sort of funding
and class full gaming represents about
15% of our total revenue.
It allows us to be more accessible,
run more development programs,
and get into more parts of the,
of the community and country.
Okay. Um, thank you very much for your submission
and for coming in today and,
and thanks for the work that you do with, with hockey
and the community and yeah, sure.
It's, um, making a good difference for a lot
of children and adults lives.
No problem at all. And thank you so much
and good luck for the rest of the day.
Two, two or three days of how many you've got to go.
Thank you. Great, thank you.
Just one day this time, but Just one day.
We have had a few other days previously, so.
Awesome. Thanks so much. Thank you so much.
Um, we'll just check if we've got this.
So our next submitter is, um, Asman, New Zealand. Welcome.
How are we? Thank you. Thanks for joining us.
We're just running a few minutes early, so apologies for,
um, uh, um, I thank you for being here, uh, early
so you can, um, submit, we've got a copy
of your written submission, 10 minutes
for your oral submission over to you. Great,
Thank you. So
Kota, my name is Yong, um,
I'm on the board of Aspen New Zealand.
Um, and I'm just truly thankful for the opportunity
to be in front of you, um, today
and sort of represent the asthma perspective, um,
and our submission.
So, um, I just also wanted to acknowledge the importance
of the legislation that's being passed.
Um, and I think it's absolutely, um, in the right step
of harm minimization toward online gambling.
And so we are supportive of what is being submitted, um,
just with that caveat of community return,
like the previous speaker.
Um, so I think just to provide a bit of an overview of
what Asma New Zealand does, we are an education
provided to both pro, uh, sort of health providers as well
as, um, patients and their whanau.
We provide advocacy services
because asthma is actually quite a trivialized condition,
but the hospitalizations, um,
and the mortality rate that comes out of that
as actually not well understood.
So there are two asthma deaths per week, um,
which is quite a sort of significant number, um,
in the grand scheme of things.
Um, and it's a very sort of manageable
and preventable, well, the impacts of it are preventable
through effective management.
So that's essentially what we aim to do is
to increase that self-management, um,
to really reduce the sort of ambulance at the edge
of the cliff model that is currently present
for respiratory conditions.
Um, and the last thing we do
as well is provide those clinical services, um,
including spirometry.
And this really heavily impacts communities
with lower GP access.
So we really plug that gap for them, for them to be able to,
um, access those primary
and preventative services, um, to get
that timely respiratory care that a lot
of them currently are struggling to obtain.
Um, so like I said, uh, asthma is quite a sort
of trivialized condition
and actually one out of five Kiwis, so about a million
of us live with asthma.
So that's, that's a pretty chunky number.
Um, but ultimately because of that number
and the poor management of it,
there is quite a significant burden on our hospital
and specialist services.
So I think that we've got about 80,000, nearly 80,000
hospitalizations as a result of respiratory conditions, um,
in 2022, which is a huge sort
of burden on both our health services as well
as the tax money that needs to go into those.
So the significance for us is
that we receive about 200 to $300,000 in,
um, funding from gambling related, um, sources.
And that is hugely critical for us
to provide those services, um, to the communities
that need it particularly, um,
because there's no centralized funding
for respiratory services.
So we are really quite heavily dependent on the stream.
And the impact of it is we're currently in quite a, uh,
pressure cooker of an environment where the
funding environment is a bit unstable is, is quite unstable.
And we've got increasing demand,
our referrals have increased by 600%, um,
over the previous years.
And, um, sorry, just lost my train of thought.
Um, so yeah, our, our demand is increasing our, um,
the volunteers capacity that's also reducing.
So what that means is we've actually had
to make some really tough decisions around the services
that we can provide.
And we've had to, um,
cease delivering pediatric services in South Auckland
because we are just, um, yeah, it's been a, it's,
it's been a challenge to deliver what we can
with the pot that we currently have.
And you can see
that the respiratory sector like this is a broader
conversation than just asthma.
Um, with the respiratory sector, we've had three
of our fellow respiratory, um, organizations had
to seize operations over the last two years
because that, um, lack
of centralized funding is really causing a lot
of pressure in that delivery.
So I think with this material loss, um,
the direct impact of that is the ability for patients, um,
experiencing asthma to receive
and access the services that they need to help them
and, um, manage their asthma effectively, um,
at the times that they need it.
Um, and I guess this, this loss of this potential loss
of revenue for us will have that similar impact.
So I, I guess what we would like
to see while asthma New Zealand would like to see is
the principle
and the current gambling bill, um, of community return,
um, reiterated in the online gambling, um, bill.
So I'll stop my ramble.
Um, and if if there are
any questions, I'd love to hear them.
That was very articulate for a ramble,
so I think Yeah. Oh, thank
You.
Good selling yourself. Um, I I feel like, um,
like I'm getting asthma just from here.
I do have asthma, um,
but I I'm sure that's, um, not correct.
I just had a, uh, I mean it sounds like you do amazing work
and it's, I suppose it's unusual that you are
so dependent on grant funding.
There are other, um, there other kind
of more centralized mechanisms
where you can provide that support.
And it was also concerning to hear, um, uh,
that the services in South Auckland are, are not being able
to be, provide it from a p pediatric, um, basis as well.
Yeah, I think it's, it echoes
the current commissioning structure in the sense that
respiratory services themselves in New Zealand, they haven't
had the chance or the opportunity to come together
and nationalize and get that national alignment that a lot
of our other counterparts such as diabetes
and palliative care, um,
and dementia MA have been able to do so effectively.
So that is something
that Aspen New Zealand are really trying to drive
and be, um, bring together to ensure
that nationally
and across the motu we are not operating in silos.
Um, but that's something that we are trying to take
to commissioning in terms of there's actually a need here
and we really require that sort of nationalized support.
Um, so I think what we can currently see as a result of
that is some regions have greater access
to respiratory services than others
and where those respiratory organizations have actually
seized operations just
because they haven't had the financial support to continue,
have been in the most sort of vulnerable regions.
So that's in Northland.
Um, and Northland currently only has a part-time
respiratory specialist.
So again, you know, they, they,
those communities feel the greatest gaps in terms
of that service access.
Thank you. I'm just really quick.
And so just, um, probably a supplementary
to the last question just in terms
of when you're making really hardcore decisions
and your first point was you want to see the bill
with a return back to community funding
'cause that's obviously really important.
Um, just when you are going through decisions,
so you've obviously got, you're not on a nationwide, um,
how, what are the sort
of the determinant factors when you are deciding
what regions and have your services?
'cause you haven't got on sort of a nationwide. Hmm.
I think for us it's a matter of our staffing locations
and where we're actually able to deliver the most impact
because our previous model was to one care, which, um,
the decision was that The decision was that
with pediatric services in South Auckland we just weren't
able to deliver as much care as we would like to, um,
compared to some of our, um,
the adult counterparts across Auckland
and Wellington, which is where we're based.
Um, so that was a really difficult, that,
that was a really difficult decision that was made
and something that we are revisiting regularly once we have
more stability around that funding.
But it's really just around, um, you know,
with our staffing pressures as well, where can we get where,
where can our patients really get the most access
with our own resourcing constraints.
Thank you So much
Melissa Lee, I think I have one minute.
Uh, you talked about the demand in greasing by 600%.
What specific services are they require?
So those are, um, those for our spirometry services,
um, spirometry services.
Um, and that's something that isn't, we receive
referrals from our g from GPS to access us for spirometry,
um, and other clinical services.
Uh, it's, it's spirometry. Yeah, so it's spirometry.
Um, and that's kind of a gap in primary care at the moment.
Explain what that means. Spirometry for people who dunno.
Um, I probably,
so spirometry is like a measure of your sort
of lung capacity.
So it's sort of like a diagnostic tool.
Um, and that sort of allows us to determine what,
um, prescriptive care that they will require
to most effectively manage their asthma.
Do it instead of the doctor.
Yes. So it's something that we deliver. Yeah,
You so much for time now,
but thank you very much for your, um, submission
and for the work that you do, uh, on the board.
So thank you very much. Thank
You so much for your time today.
Um, yes, hope the rest of the day goes smoothly.
Thank you. Our next submitters, uh,
New Zealand Powerboat Federation.
Denise? Yes, Denise.
Um, we've got, we've got a copy of your Russian submission.
Okay. And, uh, we've got 10 minutes to hear from you today,
so you're welcome to use Sure.
As much at home as you like. Thank you. Over here.
Thank you. So my name's Denise
and I'm the CEO of of the New Zealand Power Boat Federation.
Uh, so that endures, um, people who do power boat racing,
um, through jet sprinting, jet boat, river marathon,
jet skis and jets, uh, all over New Zealand.
So it covers a lot of power boat sports.
Um, we totally support the regulation
of the, um, online gambling.
Um, we would, again, like others
before we have said we'd still would like to see the money,
um, come to the community.
We, the events that we run throughout New Zealand, um,
across all of our people, we rely, um,
on a lot of volunteers.
Um, we use a lot of community groups that our events,
so we want to be able to, you know, keep using them
who then gives them the opportunity to come
and raise funds from what we are doing.
Our events are free community events
and we wanna be able to keep involving people,
but we find that we're thinking now going forward,
if the money is not there to help us to run these events,
to include people in the communities, we're gonna have
to start, uh, reducing volunteers
and start trying to do the do it ourselves,
which then the money is not going back to the community,
which is really important.
Um, the, the funding, um, that we use also is,
is mostly for the safety
and um, which gives us the opportunity with,
uh, training people.
We've got youth development programs, disabled programs,
and, um, we want to be able to include more of those people
to be able to learn training and,
and we send people internationally as well by training
through the training programs and then they go
and compete internationally, which is really important.
Um, so really I could see for ages,
but no, um, I think, um, with what we've said
and what I agree with what people are saying before me
and, um, thank you for the opportunity for us
to be able to come and say something. Appreciate it.
Uh, thanks for your submission.
I just had a question around, um, like what type of, kind
of, what type of events do you usually run in terms of, um,
how boating are, are these, um, some of the events
things that might lead on to kind of Olympic sports
or are they, um, mainly amateur based events
and competitions just for a little bit of a flavor for us.
Okay. Um, who may not be as familiar with your
Sports. So
some of the sports are most are mostly amateur,
but then you have people like, um, that we have got people
that do go, um, and compete in Canada, America.
Um, then through your water skiing, they're into Olympic,
uh, sorry, world championship sports.
A lot of our sports aren't in the Olympics.
Um, although I'm on the governing body for pelvic racing
around the world, which is a UIM, they are part of the IOC
and there are more of our sports now coming into Olympic.
So that's just a,
we are just a stepping stone in getting involved in that,
which is like electric skis
and that sort of stuff, which is, is starting
to come into the Olympics.
And so I I suppose is your message really to us that, uh,
the community grant, um, funding allows those types
of programs and will allow New Zealanders to be able
to participate in That's right.
Your competitions and then, you know, possibly go on to
That's right. So
myself, I attend this governing body, um,
meetings once a year, which is, is next month in Shanghai.
And that's, um, by going to those two, which is not funded
by by that money.
Um, but that is giving us the opportunity
to learning all the, the new sports
to bring back here, to start growing.
Um, you know, our objective with,
with having our youth development program, um, we spent,
we sent people over to get, um, the training for, for that.
'cause there's restrictions on
what age you can put children on water in a mo in a
powered sport in New Zealand.
So we are, um, now in the process of having that reduced
and this is all through, um, being part of trying to get,
you get youth and that into, um, other sports that will,
will eventually lead to Olympic. Mm-hmm.
And is there a safety component as well with teaching them
Safety?
Absolutely. That's how they gotta start with the school
before they actually go on to do the, they do the theory
before they actually do the practical. So yeah,
That sounds very important for New Zealand.
So thank you very much for the work that you do
and thanks for coming in and, uh, submitting to us. Thank
You for the opportunity and Thank you. Um, good luck
For the rest of your time.
Thank you. Thank you so much. Thank you.
So we are just running a little bit early so we won't, um,
have our, um, 11:00 AM submitter yet,
but I do understand that the four wins foundation
is available to submit.
So thank you for being here a bit early
and it's sometimes hard to organize all of this all,
um, to run totally smoothly.
So we do appreciate you being here a bit early.
We do have a copy of your written submission. Thank you.
Um, and 10 minutes set aside for your oral submission today.
So over to you. Thank you. Thank you.
Um, so good morning. Um, my name is Kylie
and I am the CEO of for Winds Foundation.
We are a class four gaming trust.
Uh, thank you first of all for the iation to come
and speak with you today.
Uh, from the outset we're, we would just like to indicate
that we're strongly opposed to the introduction
of the online gaming bill in New Zealand
and its current format.
There's two main points that I'd probably like
to speak to today.
Um, one of them being harmonization
and the second return to the community.
Firstly, around harmonization.
As a class four gaming society,
we are extremely regulated in terms of harm minimization
and take this very seriously.
Our staff, uh, venue staff, um,
must complete detailed harmonization training,
which is renewed annually.
They're trained in how to recognize signs of harm,
and this can include things such as lining up at a venue
before it opens, um, shouting at a machine, asking
to borrow money from people around them.
Our staff are taught how to engage with players,
um, proactively.
Further to this, our venues are required
to undertake a room sweep, uh, three times an hour,
keeping a record of players in the room
and monitoring for signs of harm.
Um, at this stage I failed to see
how this could be replicated in an online format.
In addition to this, we have extra measures such
as two withdrawals from an ATM would trigger an intervention
by our venue staff.
Um, one
of the other most significant harm minimization tools is the
exclusion of players under the age of 18.
Given that underage users regularly bypass
age restrictions on social media accounts,
we do have some grave concerns about the ability
of online providers to exclude players under the age of 18.
Um, and we also have some concerns about advertising
and promotion of online gambling.
Um, currently land-based gaming does not
allow advertising in any way.
In fact, our machines can't even be
visible from outside of venue.
Uh, yet this bill is gonna permit online
gaming to be promoted.
So, uh, we believe that allowing this online gaming, um,
to advertise is going to greatly increase the risk
of harm in our community.
Uh, finally, class four gaming is always part
of a broader entertainment offering.
So our venues are required to have a primary activity such
as a, a tavern or a restaurant.
Uh, in contrast, online gaming is a solitary standalone
activity with no social
or entertainment context,
which we believe also increases risk, um,
without some robust
and enforceable harm minimization measures.
We do believe that this bill would, um, lead
to an increase in problem gambling.
Our second point that we wanted
to talk about was return to the community.
Um, class four gaming exists for one reason,
and that is to return funds to the community.
And obviously you've heard from our many organizations about
the distributions.
And, um, in a similar way, we've distributed millions
of dollars to many incredible organizations
from staff at Children's hospital,
surf life saving to small clubs.
We even a few hundred dollars makes a difference.
Um, this includes funding of things like, you know,
digital devices for low diesel schools, um,
subsidizing swimming lessons in order
to reduce the high draining rate.
You know, the list kind of goes on.
We take, uh, responsibility for the distribution
of community money really seriously.
It's one of the things we are most passionate about in
returning funds directly into the communities from which
it's come from is a critical, uh, for us.
We spend time analyzing where the money's come from so
that we can send that money back to those local communities.
Our grants are robustly checked
and once they're distributed, we ensure
that the organizations are fully accountable for those funds
and where the funds are not used as we specified,
we ensure they're returned
and then reallocated
to other organizations within the community.
This is not a simple task,
obviously takes considerable time.
However, being entrusted with community funds, um, we ensure
that we do maintain the highest standards.
Um, we have noticed, uh, an increase in the number
of grant applications that we receive each month.
We have an excess of applications over funds available.
Um, it's extremely concerning.
In addition to this, our, our market is shrinking
with council policies, having restrictions on, on machines,
and we have grave concerns for the funding model,
which is supporting thousands of organizations
that they've been obviously hearing
from over the last few weeks.
So while we oppose the bill, um,
if in fact it does go ahead, we strongly recommend
that you implement a return to the community of up
to 64%.
Um, however, calculated this, uh, at,
at the moment we return 40% to the community, uh,
we also give 16% away
as a venue rental payment to the operators.
Uh, and further to this,
we pay a higher gaming duty percentage
than what is proposed.
Um, so we believe this would give millions of dollars back
to the communities and help sustain local economies.
The final matter we would like you to consider
is the further reach of Class four gaming
and stimulating the economy.
So it goes beyond grants.
We give venues
and income which they use to support staff, pay, rent,
operational costs, industry, and invests in security systems
and various pieces of infrastructure.
And all of this supports the national economy
and allowing offshore online competitors
to capture this market is just diverting millions
of dollars away from New Zealand economy.
Um, so in conclusion, the bill as it currently proposed,
we feel would reduce play in a
controlled supervised environment.
It would increase gambling related harm
and deprive local communities of critical funding.
So we really strongly urge you
to consider the current proposal
and ensure that if online gaming is introduced, it matches
or exceeds class four standards for harmonization
advertising restrictions and returns to the community.
Thank you. Thank you so much. We do
The question from Melissa Lee.
Oh, Thank you so much.
Uh, I was just looking at the map.
So you pay 40% to, given to annual mm-hmm.
20 to gain duty. You pay GST. Yes. Yeah.
So what's the remaining? So that's 9% to the, um,
The, the remaining math is very small. Yeah.
Four wins. So 9%. Yes. So how much does it equ to?
Yeah, so we pay, first of all, we pay GST of 15%
and then we pay, uh, 20% gaming duty.
So, and, and then 1.24%, uh, problem gambling.
Ev we pay 16% to the operators
and the remaining is covers our license fee,
which we pay every year, and the servicing
and running of machines and our overheads.
Yeah, that equ to roughly,
Roughly once you've paid all the servicing costs
and things like that, um, our over to cover our overheads
around 5%, 6%.
Yeah. So five to 6% basically paying for people
who are actually working for the trust
and you know, all of that stuff.
Mm-hmm. So currently, um, lots
of people have actually suggested, um, class four operators,
uh, losing the potential revenue that they have had
and they could have because of online gambling,
which already exists in the black market,
which is not regulated.
Mm-hmm. Um,
and you actually said that you, you don't actually believe
that they should be advertising.
How do you, um, suggest that we bring people
who are already moving to online, um, black market gambling
or are already addicted to those
to bring them into the regulated, uh, market,
which we are trying to do?
Yeah, I mean, clearly this is quite a challenge
and it's gonna take some expert help, you know, um,
are there opportunities with blocking, um, certain providers
who aren't licensed and, and things like this?
And I know there's been submitters, um, you know, sort
of speaking to that
and perhaps there's more work
that can be done on certain blocks, um,
to prohibit the black market operators.
Not as easy as it's, thank you. Yes, thank you.
Yeah, thank you Laga. Um, mine,
Mine's probably a supplementary
because you've given us
what you currently do physically when you move to online,
they're gonna have none of that social, the, um,
just the face-to-face, uh, interventions.
Yes. Um, so in the current bill you don't support in its
current form, but do you have any, have you had any thinking
around just the sort of incubated thinking around
what could be enforced on online world?
Because with, particularly with young people 24 7,
unless they're sleeping, they're at it.
I know. And that, and that is one of our hugest concerns.
You know, our venues are not open 24 7
and, and they do close down.
So there isn't a 24 hour availability.
It's, it's a ginormous concern of ours.
And we're sort of asking, has any consideration been given
to this and how it would be, um,
addressed online if these things aren't addressed.
It, there's a humongous risk to our community and,
and in that respect, we're really, um,
in opposition to even having online gaming,
if there's gonna be that much increased risk
to the community, you know, it needs
to be taken really seriously.
Thank You. Thank you. We, we have run out of time,
but thank you very much for your very interesting, um,
submission and being here today.
Thank you so much. Thank you so much for having me.
Thank you so much. Thank you.
Our next submitter is Youth Town
and we've got, uh, Fiona Allen here.
Welcome Fiona.
We've got 10 minutes to hear from you
and we do have a copy of your written submission,
which we've had a chance to look at.
Fantastic. Well thank you
for the opportunity select committee
to present, um, here today.
Um, my name's Fiona Allen
and I'm the Chief Executive of Youth Town.
So we were established in 1932.
We started off as Boystown, um,
and it was the New Zealand police
and the business community that came together, um,
to keep young boys off the street in Auckland.
Um, and then following, um, the selling of the Boxing Jam,
we moved into what's the iconically noun known, um,
the Nelson Street Youth Town, um, venue,
which if you lived in Auckland, um,
many Auckland has had the pleasure of visiting.
Um, during that time when that facility was closed.
Um, we then took the programs
and the activities, um,
nationwide across communities throughout New Zealand.
And so for 93 years
we've been positively impacting upon the lives
of young people, um, throughout New Zealand.
A little bit of context with regards to some
of those programs that we took out to, um,
the communities throughout New Zealand
is they deliver four key things, wellbeing, mentoring,
entrepreneurial and employability outcomes.
And we do that through working with schools, with whanau
and in the communities.
So an example is some of the programs that we run, um,
we run youth hubs.
They're currently going at the moment,
we run school holidays, um, outdoors education, uh,
youth employability program, her move activity clubs,
disability basketball, football Connect, Wai Raku,
driver's Li Learns license, youth Employability,
youth Enterprise, so, and Grow.
So a wide range of programs that, um,
are adding significant value to young people at the moment.
We're also running Oscar school holiday programs
for families, uh, with young children between the ages
of six and 12.
Um, so we see firsthand through the work that we do, um,
on impacting upon the lives of young people
and providing them the skills,
the connectiveness within their local communities
and supporting their well wellbeing.
And with the idea that that goes on throughout the stages
of their life as their developers,
young people and to young adults.
Um, in New Zealand, none of this would be possible
without the funding from Class four gaming.
And I guess we're in a different position than a number
of organizations, is that as, as an applying trust,
we're an end user and we've got that license.
So Youth Town wouldn't have the scale, the impact without
that model to deliver long-term sustainable outcomes
for people throughout New Zealand.
So the net proceeds from Class four gaming support both
youth town services, so the programs
and activities that we deliver in communities throughout
New Zealand to our young people
and also through the grants
that we distribute within local communities to.
So we understand and we, uh, know
that the online casino gambling bill, um, seeks
to regulate a previously unregulated market.
And so we do fully support the intent to protect consumers
and minimize harm.
We believe that the Bill's current form,
however admits the community benefit principle
that has undermined gambling legislation for decades.
And I understand that there's been a number
of community organizations that have expressed that.
We also consider
that it risks dismantling a vital funding stream
for youth development, sports arts and education.
And it fails to include class four gaming operators in the
future planning despite their current central
role to community funding.
So it's from that perspective
that we express our deep concern with regards to the design
of the proposed online casino gambling bill.
Um, we do feel that they, the bill is being rushed, um,
through and we strongly encourage the committee
and the government, um, to continue to listen
and work with the community.
Uh, class four societies
and the community organizations they fund would need time
to adapt, um,
and greater consultation, the greater the chance of ensuring
that all viable models have been fully explored.
If the bill was to proceed without amendment,
it represents a major risk for future funding into
our organization.
Um, and our ability to deliver our programs that we deliver
to young people will be compromised,
but also the community organizations
that we fund through the grants.
And we are seeing an increased number
of organizations wanting to support youth in New Zealand
through those grant applications coming to Youth Town.
So we feel that they'll be further compromised for them
to also deliver and support young people
throughout New Zealand.
So at the end of the day, um, we feel that, um, the brunt
of the reduced services and opportunities at a time
that we believe our young people need it the most, um, is
to have a New Zealand communities and,
and the communities throughout New Zealand to enable them
to live, learn, engage,
and thrive, um, within the communities.
We therefore believe that the principle
of sharing revenue from the gaming
with the community should not change
and the gambling should benefit the community.
So when considering,
and you've received our proposal,
so when considering the design,
we urge the committee government
to consider an alternative licensing model.
We've proposed a constructive alternative
to the commercial only licensing model
and we believe the government should recognize the unique
benefit Class four societies provide and benefit
and protect this benefit within the online market structure.
So a couple of options, um, that we considered was
to allow Class four societies
to obtain online casino licenses
outside of the auction process.
Of course subject to a viable business plan.
Harmon minimization strategies
that Class four gaming already know very well, um,
alternatively enable Class four societies
to enter joint ventures with others
and commercial operators to leverage the technology
and capital whilst also in continue to flow
to community causes.
So as Aspen mentioned online, casino GA is already here.
We already have young people participating in online
gambling in New Zealand.
How do we protect that
and ensure that the flow of funds also
that people are spending comes back into New Zealand
into supporting the wellbeing of our Tamaki and Ranu tahi.
Finally, uh, we just seek a level player field, um, online
and land-based operators.
We believe all license holders should have
an equitable opportunity.
We believe license holders should be domiciled in
New Zealand, pay full corporate tax in New Zealand
and contribute to the problem gambling levies
and operate under the same integrity standards
as our land based operators.
We know from experience our social impact measurement
and investing in young people does change lives
and it does strengthen communities.
Our proposal, uh, preserves that vision
and ensures that we can continue to support our tamaki, uh,
ranu tahi and protect investment into future generations
whilst also recognizing the changing environment We all live
in, the commercial realities
and ensuring that the benefits of regulated gambling
remain in New Zealand for our children, for our families,
and also for our future. Thank you.
Thank you so much. We do have a few minutes
left for questions.
I'll just check with colleagues.
Um, I have a question just in relation to, oh, do you go?
Um, thanks Fiona. Good to see you.
Um, really doing your hard mahi just in terms of uh,
the recommendations, the commercial benefit, uh,
it's been really clear that what we've currently got,
the bill needs to have the community return.
Yeah. And also the comment that you've made about
online gambling is already here.
Yeah. Some regulated, some
of our young people are already into it.
Um, what would be the evidence that you've seen
after being the last, since this bill has come out
that you've seen with your young people
because you provide that vital service?
Yeah, well, we're seeing more
and more young people, um, uh, wanting the programs
with regards to being connected within
their local communities.
So we're seeing an increase in an influx
of young people engaging, um, in youth town programs
and activities with regards to, um, increasing social media,
um, and young people acting in social media.
Um, I do have concerns with regards to, um,
how young people might engage with online casino, um,
gambling and primarily, um, it being easily accessible,
marketable to young people, um,
and increasing the prevalence
of their engagement in gambling.
Um, and we all know that witching hour
for young people at two o'clock when you're tired in the
morning, um, and the ability of, oh no, I've lost, lost,
lost, now I need to win, win, win.
So we're really concerned around the, the metrics that
that's going to have on, um, young people.
With regards to your, um, specific questions around the,
the changing prevalence of young people, I think
that the more that they see
and seeing is believing, the more that they see, the more
that their friends are engaging, the more that they see
that they're, they're winning,
they're getting dividends back from online gambling,
the likelihood is they're gonna increase to want
to experiment, um, with that, um,
and engage in that just to see
what my look might bring me.
So we are seeing that, um, we would see an increase
of young people engaging just to try that out, um,
and see if I can also, um, win
through this mechanism.
Thank you so much. We have now run out of time.
My question was just gonna be around noting your position
around slowing down the process.
And so I just wanted to highlight that
'cause I think that's, um, that's was in the, some
of the regulatory impact statements
but hasn't really come out in submission.
So thank you for raising that. Thank you very much.
Thank, thank you. Thank you, thank you.
We are running a little bit ahead of time
and so, um, I wondered, I do understand we've got, uh,
Christchurch casinos available if you, would you mind, uh,
doing a slightly early submission being very efficient today
with our oral submission.
So, um, thank you very much for joining us today.
Uh, we, we've got 10 minutes for your submission.
We do have a copy of your written submission.
I just wanted to check before I started that, um,
I think in your written submission you said
that you would like to present
with the Dunedin Casino. I just wanted to check.
Uh, that was at the time. Oh, okay.
But I was, I was unavailable two weeks ago. Yeah.
So yes, just for the, we own third
of Danita Casino, hence the collaboration.
Okay, fantastic. So I just wanted to check who was, um,
thank you being represented. Yeah,
No, there was an updated email, but, um, yeah,
Yeah, no, that's totally fine.
It may have gone to the parks.
I just, um, wanted to just double check that.
But anyway, uh,
we'll start your 10 minutes now. Over to you.
Yeah, thank you for the opportunity to present.
Um, I'm Bruce Robertson, the chair
of the Christchurch Casino Board.
Um, this is our chief senior Brent Anderson.
Um, Brett will make a, a few comments
and to elaborate on the key points that our submission
and then we'll certainly leave time
for questions because that's the
most interesting. But thank
You. Great.
Yeah. Thank, thank you Bruce.
Um, first wish to acknowledge the committee
and thank you for the opportunities to be here this morning.
Lydia, um, Christchurch Casino Limited supports regulation
of online casino gambling in New Zealand.
That said, we disagree with the form it is currently taking.
This is a once in a lifetime opportunity to get it right
and to provide multiple opportunities for New Zealand,
but it's more difficult to pull back if we get it.
It is to develop and grow the industry
appropriately in a measured way.
I appreciate the pre-election promises
and the need for increased government revenue,
but at what long term cost of missed opportunities
to the detriment of New Zealand
and those opportunity, you know, risk of, um, harm
the concerns we have with the bill
and without going into them in depth,
and I appreciate it's a long haul for you guys
and you've probably heard multiple repeats,
but one, the impact on New Zealand casinos.
Two of the key measures for a casino license from renewal in
New Zealand are an economic
and social impact report on the, on that casino.
And does it have a net benefit in both cases
as evident overseas, the impact
of online casinos can lead to a decrease in both.
And in one case, Sweden, a total collapse
of the land-based casino industry.
This puts risk jobs, the economic benefit,
the community engagement and support and the safe
and social gaming experience
provided for tourists and locals alike.
Putting us at further risk be the unlevel playing
field we will operate in.
One could argue that the most regulated
and safest form of gambling in New Zealand
will be the most restrictive.
The only form of gambling if this legislation goes ahead
will be with an R 20 entry criteria will be casinos.
I'm not saying I want a form of 18 year olds, um,
I've just heard, you know, the risks of
of the youth younger people.
But I would certainly want to be able to employ them.
And when you look at their figures,
you know they need the jobs at the moment.
That is, um, unpermissible under the current regulations,
the lack of required community support
and contribution that we're seeing in the current act
and know there's, um, built
and there's enough voice on that, we support that
that negatively impacts on the social fabric of communities.
The number of licenses at 15, too many.
This leads to saturation
and advertising potentially greater harm from gambling
and increased difficulty in enforcement.
Your licenses means easier oversight
and stronger compliance.
Start small and expand as required.
Any expansion to be data driven.
Initial consideration given to New Zealand casinos
or New Zealand owned businesses.
Keeping profits in New Zealand.
Innovation remains in New Zealand
or is exported rather than being developed overseas.
Gambling losses stay in New Zealand.
I mean there's no getting away from it.
Casinos make money and people do lose license periods
of three years renewable for once for up to five years.
This does not give confidence for significant investment
or adherence to the regulations.
You know, if you've got a limited window of opportunity,
some people are gonna try and take every advantage they can
to get what they can out of that.
Consumer protection. New Zealand casinos are embedded
as are the Class four and other forms
of gambling in New Zealand and our communities.
Our employees are members of those communities.
We have a door to knock on should there be concerns.
There's also in our interest to get it right, none
of us on a, on a profit above all else model as evident
with existing practices.
I do not expect the same care
and protection from some of the international operators,
some of whom are already operating in New Zealand.
Due to the nature of proposed regulations
and the intended channeling of New Zealanders,
the license platforms, there is potential
for harmonization standards not
to be at the level they could,
or in some cases should be
with no apparent strong enforcement measures concessions are
gonna be made on harmonization requirements
to ensure channeling leading to greater harm.
We have yet to see evidence of strong enforcement
if the licenses are to have real meaning and value.
Their measures need to be in place to ensure
that unlicensed operators cannot operate in New Zealand.
The strongest of these being geo blocking international
practices shown this is effective by doing so,
it reduces harm, increases,
and increases the economic benefit to New Zealand.
One of the key points I'd like the committee to consider,
and are we being aspirational enough when it comes
to casino online regulation?
My view is, I do not think we are.
Why stop at just licensing online casinos?
Why not create an ecosystem for casino online gambling
where their international recognized high levels
of transparency and low levels
of corruption while late to the party?
New Zealand has the opportunity
to place itself at the forefront of online gambling industry
and provide greater benefit than just regulation
with the related levies and taxes.
By doing so, there would be job creation for the roles
of technology compliance, custom service, dealing of gains,
finance, and responsible gambling.
While smaller MAL is a good example of
what a comprehensive online regulated
environment can achieve.
As of 2024, malt gaming industry contributed 13% of GDP.
It hosts 10% of global online gambling operations.
Employment numbers were over 11,000 people directly linked
to those operations.
Under the multi gambling authority licensed forms,
and another five to 6,000
and indirect roles in law firms, IT data centers, et cetera.
All these people need somewhere to live.
They need office, office space.
They pay taxes and they spend in the community
while on the subject of Malta, we have an online platform,
transparency christ casino.com.
Um, just on two years.
Um, we're yet to break even by liking it
to a very expensive education.
But it's, it's one learning curve
and it's certainly helps providing views on,
on this process that we're going through.
We currently apply the same level of contribution for
that online platform to our charitable trust, as we do
with our online, uh, bricks and mortar casino.
And I think that is important that there is that flow
of community benefit from online, um, gambling
to ensure we have an appropriate harm minimization approach
and a greater benefit to New Zealand.
I think we need to take a step back
and review our approach
to online gambling regulation. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Um, I just had a question around,
it was a really interesting point that you made
around the age that, um, people can, um, attend a bricks
and mortar casino.
So currently 20. Um,
and so is your proposal that the, um, that the age
should be lowered so that 18 year olds can work in casinos?
Yeah. In, in terms of,
and you know,
previous presenter is coming into a casino at the age
of 20 as a rite of passage.
We, we have families turn up at the door,
they almost push the 20-year-old birthday, you know,
celebrant forward
and they step with pride
with their driver's license or passport.
And, you know, we invite 'em in. It's, I've turned 20.
And one of the key things, if you look back,
when gaming regulations came to space, the view was,
you know, the harm caused by gambling.
You did want to influence youth.
And hence you can understand not wanting them to be dealing.
'cause admittedly, as a dealer, you sort of,
you're setting lots of money, lots of, um, turnover,
and you think you can
contribute to actual outcome with the game.
You cannot, but, you know, some of the worst cases
of problem gambling can come for those that work in casinos.
Mm-hmm. But now with the current regulations,
you've got lotto, you've got class four, you've got the TAB,
we go online at 18, you're gonna have 18 year olds.
You know, some are already exposed, there's no denying it,
but more than ever exposed to casino gambling.
So, as I said, I'm not necessarily wanting the regulations
to change that.
We can have 18 year olds come through the door,
but the way it is, you cannot have anyone under the age
of 20 on a license gaming space, which
that prohibits us from employing 18 year olds.
And then when you take into account the employment rate
and that age group, it's, it's massive.
It's interesting. I mean, we have had some other
submitters, um, advocate for 18
to be the consistent age anyway.
So you're not, I'm not alone in that.
Um, even though that's,
I understand not your submission now, um,
but I was just wondering in terms
of if there was a change in the age, even if it was just for
allowing people to work there rather than gamble, um,
would you, would you think that there would need
to be additional safety measures
or additional, um,
harm minimization requirements in the legislation?
Or, or do you think that, uh, operators would be able
to implement that?
I'm just wondering. Obviously
We, we have change.
We have internal policies that address that. Anyway.
Um, what I touched on before about density
or those that work in that industry,
especially from the gaming side, think they know best
and know more than the mass, which aren't aware
of, um, allows 'em to do.
So we, we identified that with, um,
messages within the building on that.
Now I think that the key is,
is basically like any responsible employers
of creating a safe environment
and which, you know, we consider we do.
So no, I do not see it needs to change from
that aspect. Melissa,
Question, uh, thank you.
Uh, you heard that, um, C four contribute 40%, um,
of their revenue to, uh, community.
Good. What percentage
of your revenue do you actually provide to community?
Yeah, direct put it bluntly, directly bugger all, um,
in terms of when casinos were licensed in New Zealand,
they were set up as profit making entities.
So were not set up as charitable community entities.
Yes, we have a contribution of our gaming revenue 0.7%,
which goes with a minimum amount of 200,000.
And this is, we're not loan in this.
And then we have an additional amount of 300.
So the minimum amount we pay every year, direct community
through our trust is 300,000.
Um, it is higher than that.
As I said, our online casino crisis casino, Malta,
um, contributes.
We take the same formula
to the revenue gambling revenue on there,
even though it's making a loss.
And then you have our sponsorship,
our direct community support, um, community events
and such, like, so all up, I'd say,
you know, has, has a guess.
We're probably looking close to six,
$700,000 a year within Christchurch. Yeah,
You said above roll up.
Oh, as a percentage. When you, you know, you take the 40%,
you know that the Class four Yeah.
Provides, yeah. Uh,
but again, it's the, it's the intent purpose, yeah. Just
Quickly. Yeah.
Um, youth Town basically talked about how we needed
to actually, uh, make it even across, you know, all of the,
um, gambling, whether it's C four
or online, should actually, you know, be equal in terms
of the way that they contribute to our community.
Do you think, uh, physical casinos like yourself should to,
It's not a case of shooting to, it's ultimately a case
of could we afford to, and reality is if the same rules
or criteria were applied, we would not exist.
I mean, our overheads are significantly higher.
Um, you know, we, it's a different scale.
Um, we're not a tenant.
We own the building, but yeah, reality is real.
Realistically, casinos would cease
to exist if the same mathematics was applied.
Okay. Well, thank you so much
for being here with us today.
Um, I hope you didn't have to travel, uh,
too far, uh, to join us.
Probably the hardest bit was from Sky City
here in the rain, but, oh,
Um, thank you so much, uh, for being here.
I appreciate the opportunity. Thank
You. Thank you. Our questions.
Thank you.
Uh, we do, now I understand.
Have Cystic Fibrosis Association of New Zealand. Welcome.
Thank you. Thanks for joining us.
We, we've got a copy of your written submission
and we had 10 minutes, uh, to hear from you,
so you're welcome to use all of that time
or leave some time for questions.
Um, so over to you. Thank you for being here, Kia.
Um, nice to see you, Camilla. Nice to see you
Too. Ted. Um,
I am Lisa Burns.
I'm the Chief executive, uh,
for Cystic Fibrosis New Zealand.
Um, and, and yes, as Camilla said, I will take, uh,
our submission as read.
Um, cystic Fibrosis, uh, as many have learned, uh,
over the previous years, is a long-term chronic condition.
Um, the funding of Tri Kafta has been a game changer
for hundreds of our community.
Um, but what that has meant is,
as an unintended consequence, is that the burden
of care has significantly shifted from
the health system onto community, as in our organization
that provides the services
and support, uh, to the 606 families.
Um, living with cystic fibrosis in New Zealand.
Um, we are heavily reliant on the funding
that we get from trusts
and foundations, many of which are local community funders
who specifically provide support into various
regions of New Zealand.
Um, basically if the, if the bill wasn't amended, uh,
to ensure that there was a significant amount going back
to community, what that would mean is
that many organizations like ours, um, would end up having
to cut services, cut support programs.
And, and certainly it would mean that the amount
of support we're able to provide this community would be
significantly impacted.
Um, I've been a long term advocate for the role
that community organizations play as a,
as really important part of the health system.
Um, I believe that the services that we provide
and the support that is delivered
by community organizations is an
integral part of the health system.
And if we didn't exist
and those services weren't available,
that pressure would go back onto a health system,
which is already buckling.
Um, while we don't advocate for gambling
and the harm that gambling does, what we do advocate for is
that if these changes are made,
that money goes back into community
because it is a lifeline for us
and many of the other organizations, um,
who are in a similar situation to us.
Um, so yeah, I won't obviously go through, um, the detail
that's in our submission,
but obviously, um, the biggest portion
of our funding comes from trusts and foundations.
It allows us to deliver the support that we deliver, um,
and the costs that we are incurring, um, with that shift
of burden of care, um, are increasing.
And so we are becoming ever reliant on trust
and foundations, and there is more
and more pressure going on to those trust
and foundations, um, than we've ever seen previously.
So, um, yeah, I appreciate the opportunity to speak, um,
today and to advocate for our community,
but also for all community organizations
who are reliant on this funding
and would welcome any questions on my submission.
Amazing. Well, thank you so much for being here, Lisa.
And also, um, can I commend you on your beautifully
illustrated submission?
Thank you. I think it's, um, probably one
of the more attractive ones that we've seen.
Um, and so thank you for the effort that you put into that.
Um, I just had a question around how things have been
for your organization recently in terms of funding.
We have heard some feedback from other organizations
that received grant funding that, um,
there's been a reduction recently.
Other cost of living issues have impacted.
How, how has the recent, um, financial, uh,
economic circumstances affected, uh, affected the work
that you do fibro?
Yeah, that's a great question.
So, uh, us like many organizations are heavily reliant on
the kindness of Kiwis, um, which is, you know, just
donations that come in from community.
So the, the health
and economic challenges
that New Zealand has been facing has definitely impacted,
um, people's ability to be generous and give, um,
but equally with the changes that we have seen, um,
there has been a significant uplift in the number
of organizations that are applying to funders.
Um, and so the competition for that funding has become, um,
like nothing I've ever seen, um, in my time in the,
um, for purpose space.
Um, and certainly we've had letters back from some
of the funders who have said that they have received,
you know, over a million dollars of requests,
hundreds of applications.
Um, and so where you may have traditionally got, you know,
$30,000, you might get five now,
because they're trying to support more
organizations who are struggling.
Um, and so what that's meaning is you're starting to have
to make trades and you can't necessarily be able
to deliver everything you wanna be able to deliver
because that funding is, is starting to become compromised
and it's getting squeezed.
Um, and we have four social workers that are employed
by Cystic Fibrosis New Zealand, that support this community.
Um, we do receive a little bit of funding from TFA to Aura
to help with those costs, but it doesn't even come close.
And that's just the cost of our social workers.
So that pressure is on,
and when you are supporting a community of people
who are living with a lifelong chronic condition, you know,
it's, it's really tough.
It's hard
For sharing that.
Just checking with colleagues if I've got any questions.
No, I think that was really clear.
So thank you so much for coming in today. Thank you.
And for your submission and for answering, um, my questions.
Thank you. Appreciate your time so
Much. Thank you to
see you. All right.
We, uh, running a little bit early,
but I do understand we've got trust house.
Thank you, um, for joining us.
Um, you've seen, uh, what, what happens here
with giving 10 minutes for your submission,
and we've got a copy of your submission already,
so you can take that as read
and up to you how you use that time.
If you'd like to leave some time for
Ric, thank you for the opportunity to come
and speak with you today.
And I'm apologetic
that my submission didn't have any illustrations
and that it, unfortunately, no,
That's not necessary, but always appreciated.
Um, I am the CEO of Trust House group,
which is based at Masterton.
We run a range of businesses.
We are a community housing provider, so we own 450
affordable social rental houses.
Uh, we own a hotel and seven bars and restaurants.
We own a little hydro electric power scheme,
and we have 127 gaming machines.
And that's the point of being here today is the gaming
machines and the proposed bill, obviously, um,
terrestrial gaming machine operators like us.
And with it, the distributions that we can make
to community groups are facing what I would call almost a,
a gaming global warming event
in the form of this bill.
And what we need is not what this bill proposed we need, I,
I believe is a, an organized, mandated managed retreat
or migration from the status quo to
the new way of gaming.
In our seven venues, we see
a customer base that is, without being too general about it,
older rather than younger.
I don't see a next generation of
people coming to our outlets for their gaming.
They're doing it online.
I have three daughters in their twenties and thirties.
I'm not aware that they are into gambling,
but if they were, I don't imagine they'd come to our venues.
We are seeing a reduction in revenue from
our physical sites.
So the, the migration from land-based operators
to online is inevitable, I think.
Um, but as you've heard,
it is a pretty unregulated wild west
online system at the moment.
And so from that perspective, I welcome this bill,
but I do think, um, it's not a managed retreat
or migration offered by this bill
to a better way in the future.
There are two forms of harm that I see, and I,
and I'm, I've been sitting here for 40 minutes
and I've heard the same sorts of themes,
so I do run the risk of echoing that, I guess.
But the two harms that I see is, firstly,
obviously the no requirement
for any distribution back to community.
Um, the minister has stated
that she doesn't want a community sector
that's reliant on grant funding from gaming.
Well, the reality is
that the community sector does have a significant reliance
to grant making from gaming
and from community trust, from energy trust
for licensing trusts.
And this bill feels more like a revenue grab by government,
taking that revenue
by licensing online operators,
but ripping the heart out of community at the same time.
So it's a substitution for that.
The second harm I see is around, um,
the minister's objective that online gaming will lead
to greater harm minimization.
And I struggle to see how that can be achieved.
Uh, at the moment, as you're aware,
land-based operators have fairly stringent requirements,
which we willingly implement 15 minute sweeps
of our gaming rooms, uh, face-to-face discussions
with people who are identified
as potential problem gamblers.
I don't see an operator, an online
operator based in mulcher or Macau
or Mumbai interacting
with someone in their pajamas in Euna gaming
and saying, you may have a, a gaming problem.
Um, I just don't see how that's going to be achieved.
And there are all sorts of ways that people can avoid
online monitoring and policing of their gaming habits.
We talk in New Zealand a lot about the welfare state,
but the welfare state isn't just government.
That is a state that is a partnership
between government and community.
And this bill, I believe, um, takes a wrecking ball
to the community part of that partnership,
and it will result in considerable harm
to community organizations.
I've worked in community grant making
for 30 years across four different organizations,
and I've seen the impact of community granting
in terms of stitching together the community fabric
that sustains communities throughout New Zealand.
And I think this bill has the, I was gonna say, potential.
It's stronger than potential, the great likelihood
that it will cause great harm to them. And that's me.
Thank you. Thanks for your submission
and for, um, your considered comments on it.
I just had a question around, um, I'm interested, you,
you may not know the answer to this,
but is online, is there any evidence around
the addictive nature of online gambling compared to, um,
the class four gambling that we see
with the bricks and the water gambling? Is it, I
I'm not aware specifically of any evidence,
but I do know might be too strong a word
that if someone is able to gamble online
for unlimited periods of time, the potential
for addiction must be greatly enhanced as opposed
to a regulated physical environment, um, where,
um, first of all, you've gotta go to the venue
so people see you go to the venue.
So there is some, um, self-policing around that,
and then there are staff there managing that process.
Um, there may be ways that online gambling
minimization can be improved.
What I'd like to advocate for
and ask the committee to consider is
to slow this process down
and just stop for a cup of tea, if you like.
And, um, consult much more widely with
the, the online, the physical operators,
but also with the community sector, which is the biggest
casualty and refugee from this whole process.
I'd also like to advocate that if we do move
to online auction, that those, um,
bidders be required to make significant distributions back
to community and also advocate for some community licenses,
um, so that we can manage the transition from
this physical based gambling to online gambling in a way
that minimizes harm and takes community with us.
And preserves that that social license
and social contract that currently exists.
New Zealand at the moment accepts gambling on the basis
that there is a quid pro quo return back to community.
This bill has none of that.
Thank you, Melissa. Uh, since we're talking about, um,
returning to community
and prevention, uh, we have people
who are addicted to gambling.
How many people have your organization banned from coming
into your premises from to gamble
because they have addiction to gambling?
And what have you done about their addiction?
Uh, those that are identified as having a,
a gambling problem or excluded from our premises.
I don't know the exact number across all
of our premises over recent years,
but it would be a handful.
It's not a huge number.
There is data that suggests that, I think it's 0.3%
of gamblers, uh, problem gamblers.
Um, so it's a small number.
The current physical regime minimizes
that as much as it can.
And I would've concerns in the move to online how that
harm minimization is replicated.
And I think the potential is
for much greater harm minimization, not as a minister,
has stated as one objective that it's gonna reduce harm.
I think C four obviously does great in terms of the way
that they contribute, contribute to the community, 40%.
Do you think that contribution is enough when you're
actually creating, um, uh, addiction?
Uh, I don't accept that we're creating addiction.
I accept that we are endeavoring
and using our best endeavors to minimize addiction.
Um, so yes, I do think 40% is sufficient
and it's 40% more than the,
the proposed distribution from this bill.
The question? No. Okay.
Thank you, um, for your submission
and for answering our questions.
We really, really appreciate it. Thank you.
Our next, uh, submitter is night song.
I think we've got Ben Crowder welcome
running a little bit early.
So thank you for being available.
Uh, we've got 10 minutes for your submission.
We do have a copy of your written submission
Right over to you.
I've just reread it, so apologies for the typos.
It was 11 o'clock on a Sunday night, so,
um, after a one week,
We, we can forgive that. Don't worry.
Great. Um, Koto, um, my name is Ben Crowder.
I am, uh, the executive director of Night song,
which is a charitable trust that creates theater, uh,
original New Zealand work, uh,
but also works with, uh, giving opportunities
for young people, uh, you know,
varying from working within the youth justice facilities.
It's South Auckland,
but also with the refugee community,
um, and so on and so on.
Um, thank you for, um,
this opportunity, uh,
and also, uh, taking on the task of listening
to the community sector or the wider sector.
Um, obviously not just the community sector,
about the effects of this proposed bill
and, uh, hopefully taking some of our thoughts, uh, with you
as, uh, it's thrashed out.
Um, this is the first time
I've ever spoken to a select committee.
Um, slightly nervous, um,
but I suppose it slightly indicates why, uh,
I think it's really important to have a say in this, um,
and that it is something that I believe
has potentially quite devastating
for various parts of the sector.
Um, and, and talking about the wider community sector.
I speak particularly for arts
and culture, that's where I'm a bit of focus today,
but I'm well aware that we are, I think, maybe the fourth
or fifth, uh, beneficiary from class four,
uh, distributions.
Um, and there's a lot of other very worthy things, um,
potentially sometimes slightly embarrassing
how worthy those things are In terms of, uh, our ask um,
online casinos, um, in my opinion,
and from the reading I've done, um,
they definitely have the potential to be high turnover
and, um, high risk.
Um, I think most things
that are available on tablets and phones
and screens are naturally addictive.
Um, putting a game onto it is even more so, um,
putting money in the an an incentive is even more.
I mean, you know, people get excited about giving you a
little cherry, uh, when they're playing a game, so I,
I think, you know, it's wild.
So, um, I think those are the criteria for
what currently are, uh, class four gambling.
Um, those things, I feel
that if anything could exceeds those criteria, um,
which currently it's 40% return to community could, um,
I'm aware that you received a lot of submissions.
I tried to work out how many last night,
but it's seemed like there are a lot, um, an ascertain
to provide you with an answer for all the answer.
But I would, I would say that indicates quite how,
how many people are reliant on this money.
And none
of us in the community sector are particularly thrilled
that the money comes from gambling.
But equally gambling is part of society that has been
for a very, very long time.
Um, and unless we go, we're just gonna cut it all together,
but I think we, we we're long horses long bolted on that.
Um, people are already gambling online.
Um, so I think to kind of get regulated, um,
is really important.
Um, but with that, if it is gonna be regulated,
uh, I think it needs to,
it is gonna create harm to the country.
Um, but I don't think it can be stopped.
And if it is gonna create harm, I think some of it needs
to go back to creating good.
Um, which I think a lot of the organizations that, uh,
currently benefit from pokies gaining trusts,
we are aware too, as an organization that year on year,
it's become harder to gain that income from gaining trusts
because their monies have gone down
and also potentially have had to prioritize over COVID
and various other things.
Uh, more direct community benefits in terms of sort of, uh,
charitable food banks, et cetera, et cetera.
Um, I've been looking at other things I, I have
to dive in there.
You know, they're either casinos themselves,
they don't give very, in fact, I mean,
it's terrible how little they give.
I wish I'd been around for the submissions for that one,
but I think I was still at university.
Um, but you know, I think Auckland particularly is less than
1% of their, their income.
I know they give a lot more to the government in terms
of licensing, but,
and I know they make claims about being great at
entertainment and facilities and tourism
and hospitality of employment general economic kind of boom.
But also there is huge damage I think we're all aware of.
Um, plus it smells, um,
the whole thing is a little bit dubious,
but as I said, it can't be stopped.
Um, I guess we can try some geoblocking if we want to,
but I know my 14-year-old could get past that straight away,
so I'm sure most people can.
I think the previous man did talk about that it is something
that the younger generation are doing more
of rather than being in the dark kind of thing.
I mean, gambling has traditionally in this country being
associated with drinking sport,
beer racing, all of those sort of things.
It is changing, um, in the same way, you know, I mean, it's,
I think it's no surprise that I think the greatest
beneficiary is New Zealand rugby from,
uh, pokies at the moment.
I think all top 10 is sports.
So I do think if it does get some redistribution,
I think it's good to kind of look at the changing country
and how the country now is and reflect the how we all are.
Um, obviously
there doesn't need to be provisioned for problem gambling,
addiction, um, as part of things
and make sure it's regulated
and is fair, all of those sort of things.
But my belief is that it's really important we embed, uh,
this provision at the beginning.
Um, because once it's,
it'd be very hard to get it in later.
Um, yes, potentially the government
or the crown can take taxes or monies or fees,
but there's always a risk about which government is in power
and which priorities are being addressed at any stage as to
how that is distributed.
Um, and you know, that I would say good, just
to make it very clear from the beginning, um, arts
and culture, ooh, we've been going 20 odd years.
We're a charitable trust.
We are part of what's called the independent sector
as opposed to the investment clients
of the Crown Agency, creative New Zealand.
So we are constantly pivoting, dealing things
with contestable funding.
Um, it lands the contestable funding lands long
after you have to put your program to bed.
Your partnerships with venues and festivals and the like.
Um, other than working in the arts,
I'm a reasonably intelligent man,
and I, I'm sure I could have done other things.
Um, but I do it because I think it's important.
Um, our current 12 month budget has a
$66,350 thing from gaming trusts,
um, you know, uh, budget line.
However, you know, yesterday I found out from Kerry, Kerry,
uh, the local or the third North District
council who funded us.
We are one of the few people that were funded, uh,
but they underfunded us by a thousand dollars.
We asked for three eight, they gave two eight.
So that's another thousand dollars I need to find.
Uh, only in the last hour I've checked Auckland Council's
Community Committee's website,
and I can see the meeting they had yesterday
that they have approved us for $10,000 for an upcoming tour
of work for young people to, uh, the M Arts Center
to poet at West A club and to pump house on the North Shore.
But they, they, we asked for 25, we gotted,
this is all good, but we are
committed to doing these things.
And where we normally would try
and find the money for this is adding to
that 68 ask that's already there.
And, you know, I lose a bit of sleep.
I can cut a few things. We could do less shows.
There are less impacts in real terms performing the show
that we'd have to sell tickets about $80, 60 to $80.
That's not realistic for families
to take their children to theater.
That's, and no one's being paid well.
But we do like to make sure we, you know, uh, pay our actors
and the venues that keep everything going.
Um, likewise, this gets repeated the whole time.
Um, there's a new creative
sector strategy, amplify it identifies huge growth
for the sector, but currently no additional resource hearing
that the minister would like the community sector to not be
as reliant on gaining is fantastic,
but there are no pathways available for us.
We are just endlessly scraping more
and more for less, uh, working longer hours.
We've never had less administrations administrative staff.
Um, hence writing things at 1130 at night on a sudden.
Um, so at a minimum, I would say, um,
support, uh, that this provision,
because I think New Zealand really values
what the community sector does.
Um, and it, it isn't a sector that is well resourced.
A lot of people do it for love.
We have a lot of volunteers,
but also we give people opportunities to do things.
Um, this show, the Worm was a lot
of children's first experience.
The lovely Anna Pal, who is the main character in Tina was
one of the leads in it.
Albert, uh, LA Lepa was a graduate straight outta
toy Ari from the Hut.
We give these people jobs
and they inspire people who think, not necessarily they want
to be an actor, but there are other ways of living.
And thanks. I'll shut up that. Thank
You. Um, well, you did incredibly
well for your first submission.
You've filled the full 10 minutes. Um, sorry.
And, uh, thank you so much for your, um, submission and,
and for the amazing work you do in the community.
I'm sorry we don't have any, um, time to ask you questions,
but We'll, we'll, good stuff. Thank
You. Well, look, if you do, do
it, I don't,
I know I've been kicked off, but
how it's distributed I think is the next question.
But, uh, you're very interested that
Yeah, good point to leave us with.
Thank you so much, Ben. We really appreciate it.
Alright, our next, um, submitter is Sport Bay
of Plenty Charitable Trust.
Got Nicholas Chambers here. Welcome.
Hello, how are You? I'm very well, thank you.
Thanks for sticking with us.
Uh, we've got 10 minutes for your submission
and we do have a copy of, uh,
your written submission already, so you can take
that as read over to
You. Sure. Thank you.
Uh, Kilda, uh, thanks
to the select committee for the opportunity
to provide written and verbal submissions, uh,
against the online casino gambling bill.
Um, I'd also like to thank as well, uh,
bay Plen mp Tom Rutherford for his openness
to discuss our concerns over the last few
weeks, physically in person.
Um, our role as a regional Sports Trust provides leadership
support to a wide range of play active recreation
and sport providers across our communities, uh, in the Bay
of Plenty from Te Kaha in the East to Regi in the south,
and Wahi in the north.
Um, our sector as a whole remains fragile
amidst the financial situation or financial environment.
Um, has reduced revenue revenue streams
across our stakeholder network.
Um, loosely speaking and,
and like many others, I've,
I've heard the previous people's submissions as well.
Um, the nonprofit se nonprofit sector finds itself in a
whirlpool of rising costs versus reduced income,
reduced income to roughly the tune of 20 to 30% annually.
Critically class four gaming or,
or pokey funding, as we we like to call it, uh,
plays a significant role in subsidizing community sport at a
grassroots level, A level whereby social relationships are
nurtured, social cohesion is embraced,
and physical health is enhanced.
The impact of the proposed legislation threatens the
existence of those environments.
And we believe the open dialogue regarding the prevalence
of on online platforms versus the existing system structures
and funding mechanisms to be to,
to create those positive community outcomes needs
to be addressed and discussed.
Uh, I would like to reinforce that I'm not here today
to have an ethical discussion around the harm
that gambling causes.
Um, I understand that is an issue.
I think it's a bigger issue than, than just this discussion.
Um, and one that our sector particularly would,
would embrace the opportunity
to have a discussion about further with other people, um,
across the profit based and nonprofit based sector.
Um, the community outcomes that, that we,
we've put in our bill are really well documented.
Um, and while I wanna be clear
that I'm representing the sport
and recreation sector as well, there are a number
of other community sectors
that would also be impacted by this bill.
So arts organizations as the, the gentleman
before me, um, came on and spoke, um,
and lots of others as well, all
around embracing community outcomes that can achieve things
for young people, middle-aged people,
and, um, other people, other people as well.
So it's, it's important that
everybody's voice is recognized.
Um, I'm sure the debate will rage on, uh,
between whether physical gambling machines
and online platforms produce people to go one way, one way
or the other, and what the subsequent impact of that is.
But this morning alone, I ordered my coffee online, uh,
I paid for my pure online
and later I'll pick up my groceries,
which I inevitably paid for online.
The case for online platforms making things easier for us is
the strongest it's it's ever been.
Um, and I think that's something that we really need
to consider as we, as we take this bill forward
or we see where this bill goes into the future.
Um, Martin Snedden, who you've probably heard of no doubt,
but Martin Research Sneden's research, uh, suggests
that overseas studies, uh, from Spence Pel relating
to Casino Cosmopolitan
and Vegas operations have already showed evidence
that the introduction of online gambling has reduced
physical gambling to the point whereby physical casinos were
forced to close due to the strong uptake of gambling
through MO mobile platforms, uh, more locally
for us in the bay, plenty.
A reduction of access to community funding through
pokey funding, um,
would hinder significant projects and activities.
Two examples. Uh,
one being destination skate park at Mount Monga, um,
which was a derelict piece of land, uh,
that had more than a million dollars worth
of contribution from pokey funding, um, to finalize the,
to finalize a project to give a space for whanau,
for Tamari, for Ranga Tahi to be able to play,
participate in sport,
and also to be able to actively recreate as well.
Zespri aims games, which delivers more than $8 million
to the local economy, um,
is also hugely reliant on gaming funding
to run its operations.
That event alone produces opportunities across a very busy
week in toga, the only time
where air traffic is possibly worse than yours, um,
for more than 14,000 tamari from 430
schools across New Zealand.
So what do we wanna see? Uh, firstly, I think it's important
to acknowledge that the current funding mechanism
and the ethical discussion around gaming trust funding
and what that perpetuates in
community outcomes is not perfect.
Um, and that is something that as you, as I've already said,
needs to probably be addressed in a, in a separate forum.
Um, however, I think it's unfair to suggest
that those people that will be affected by this bill,
community clubs, uh, regional sports organizations,
national sporting organizations
and lots of other community providers had no hand in the
design of what that looks like today.
So I think it's, uh, really important that we consider, uh,
what will the impact be, uh,
and let's take a pause for a moment, look forward
and say, how can we build a more sustainable system together
and do it through, through a process of collaboration, um,
rather than pushing forward on the, on the current bill,
uh, from yourself specifically.
Um, I suppose the first thing that we want,
or one of the things that we want is that any gambling
that takes place within New Zealand to be regulated
for the protection of communities.
Um, and also for community benefit as well.
It's important that it's a regulated, regulated industry,
as other people have alluded to.
It's very easy to gamble in different places
and cloud your IP address and various bits and pieces.
So I think it's important that there's
regulation that sits behind it.
We also believe that any future legislation, uh, relating
to gambling through online platforms should be kept in line
with current practices, ensuring
that community good is a leveraged outcome or benefit.
Um, and we also believe that 40%,
which is the current amount in the 2003, uh, gambling act,
uh, 40% of gambling profits, be it digital
or physical, um, be committed to the nonprofit sector
with a particular focus on sport and recreation.
Put simply the proposed bill risks, growing the gap
between those that can afford to play
and those that can't afford to play local
and regional organizations are committed to bridging
that gap as effectively as possible,
minimizing inequities across our communities
and for our participants as a sector, our ability
to reduce those inequities will be significantly impacted if
the proposed legislation proceeds
the sector urges this select committee to hit pause,
have a cup of tea, as somebody said earlier.
Um, and consider the impacts described
through our collective submissions.
I'd like to thank you for your time today, allowing us
to come and talk to you, hear what we've got say.
Um, and I'm happy to take any questions. Thank you.
Thank you so much, and thanks for, um, coming here
and also engaging with our colleague, Tom,
and we'll definitely pass on your best wishes to him.
Um, I suppose the thing which, um, I took from your
was the, uh, value that investing in sport has
for the rest of the community.
Um, and I've,
I've had a look at the report
that you linked the Invest New Zealand report.
Um, so I just, I mean, I, I think it's a point well made,
but I just wanted to know if you wanted
to expand on that any, any further
The social return on, but Yeah.
Yep, yep. Um, so it's, uh, obviously I,
I wasn't actually part of that, uh, part
of the, the research work.
Um, but the social return on investment, I think it's $2 12
for every dollar that every dollar
that's invested, something along those lines.
Yeah. Okay. Um, so I think it, it, it refers to
what are the, uh, ag, uh, sorry,
or the, yeah, the aggregate social benefits
that you get when you invest into sport and recreation.
So obviously when you go and you play netball or you go
and play whatever you play and you get some kind
of a subsidy because it's been funded by X, Y, Z, um,
that tangible part is obviously a,
a a dollar buys you a a shirt to be able to play in
or for a referees to do a referee match.
Um, but it's also, what are those more, um, sort
of hidden benefits, I suppose, things
around your social capital and, and the,
and the wellbeing that it can create for you?
It's very murky because it's hard to put a number on what
that looks like, because obviously every individual, it's,
every individual is different.
But, um, it's really designed, I suppose, to be able to talk
to, you know, every time we step onto a court,
every time we go onto a field, every time we run
around a track, there's a, there's
a physical benefit to that.
There's also a social benefit that comes alongside that.
Um, and that, uh, one
of the previous gentleman was talking about, um,
knitting communities together.
Um, that is very much what sport
and recreation is able to do.
Um, arguably, I know it'd be biased,
but arguably sport has a very unique way of being able to do
in a way that maybe some other, other organizations can't,
or maybe the other other industries aren't able to do that
as quickly and as efficiently as we can.
So our value is, um, I don't think is ever,
ever really in doubt,
but I won't lie, it's becoming harder.
Mm-hmm. It is becoming harder
and harder as our communities get more and more diverse
and sport and recreation has to, it's good
'cause it's fleet foot, so we can
kind of move left and right.
Um, but we are kind of constantly running to stay still
because, especially for our young people where Tam Tahi,
the things that they want to participate in,
the activities they wanna do, what they want to get out
of it, are very, very different.
You went back to when I was younger,
which was a long time ago, it was very physical.
Now it's not as physical.
It's equally as, uh, mentally stimulating as it needs
to be physically stimulating as well.
So it talks to some of those. Bob,
Thank you so much.
I think that's all about, do
Have a quick, quick, quick question?
Yeah. You said 40% of walking should actually, um,
bit of change to the community.
Casinos don't do that. Do you think they should?
Yes. Wholeheartedly, yes.
Thank you. Oh, very, very short one.
'cause you said, um, in your sort last closing comments that
the committee should consider, um, pushing to pause
and actually do better consultative, um, consultation
with the community to get a better design of the bill.
Mm. Do you wanna unpack just really quickly a bit more?
Uh, yes. I, I suppose, I suppose what I'm,
I'm ultimately saying is that the, the intent of the bill,
I have no issue with the intent of what it's trying,
what it's aiming to achieve.
I more have an issue with the, the impact of it.
So the way
that it plays out would be a more stepped out approach
where we'd be able to kind of have hui
and kind of collaborate
and discuss together ways
that can protect the current system, um, without kind
of ripping the tablecloth out from sort of underneath it.
If, if that makes sense. So hitting pause means that
If we, If we want to progress, then we have
to work together and we have to collaborate.
And everybody's the decisions that one government makes
or another government makes isn't gonna land well
with absolutely everybody.
So if it's not gonna land well with everybody, then
that's fine, but what I am saying is, um, even when we agree
to disagree, how can everybody progress and move forwards?
And the only way we can do that is by hitting pause,
having a discussion, um,
and being able to map out what the potential threats
and risks might be if somebody proposes X.
Um, and then what the impacts of that might be.
So our sector is more than happy
to support those conversations probably via sport
New Zealand, I would imagine, um, in terms
of a government led, uh, government led approach.
Thank you. Thank you so much.
Well, thank you for coming in
and appreciate your time today
and your submission. All good.
Thank you. Appreciate it. Thank you.
Just, um, June briefly, thank you.
We have the Margarita Valley c the Labor Electric Committee
here, Harry and Trevor, thanks for joining us.
We've got 10 minutes, um, to hear your submission.
Obviously Lam and I declare a conflict with this one.
Um, Melissa note. Yeah, thanks Thomas. Thanks.
Talk to you. You've gotta convince Melissa.
Um, we've got 10 minutes, um,
but as you've seen now, our other submitter is, is not here.
So, um, over to you.
I thank you. I thank you ladies.
Uh, Tina Ka, uh, Melissa Lee, say thanks, Camilla
and Laga for the opportunity to present.
Look, uh, ladies, I'm, I'm joined by Trevor, one
of the stewards of our community,
and we represent the Mangere Labor Electric Committee.
We're comprised of, um, largely re residents who live
and work in, in re
and we also represent not only the views
of Labor Party members, but our community at large
and whom we are connected with.
Look, um, as the bill stands, look, we,
we unequivocally oppose it.
And, and for the reasons being is that we simply believe
that there just are not enough safeguards
and there's not enough harm reduction provisions
to protect communities such as ours.
Now, you know, Camilla and,
and LA Mona will obviously be aware of the demographic
of Mandi, where 60% Pacific, uh, 15% Maori,
uh, and amongst other community groups.
But there's three key submissions
or three key points here that we want
to wanna make in regards to our submission.
But just two preliminary thoughts.
When the first regulatory impact statement was released,
we believe that there was insufficient time
for the community to give feedback on it.
And by the time the second regulatory impact statement was
released, the government had already made its decision
or already promoted what its regime was gonna be.
So we think that there's some actual issues
around the engagement
or this particular community consultation that we had
with NGOs and community groups that work on the frontline
with, with, with gaming harm.
So the three points that we want to acknowledge is,
number one, there's a disproportionate harm
to communities such as ours.
We live and breathe.
We live, uh, in beautiful community,
but it is one of the most deprived communities here
in Tama Makoto.
And what you find in those socioeconomic communities
are social hazards, proliferation of liquor stores,
and in particular, proliferation of class four
or land-based gaming machines.
Trevor and I, I work at the Margae Community Law Center
within the space of a hundred meter radius,
there are two poke machines, right?
Two venues that offer poke machines.
One, and there's a third one,
just a kilometer down the road.
So there's a proliferation of these particular, um, physical
or conventional gaming machines, for lack of a better term.
So as it stands, our community will really struggle with,
with these kind of, uh, challenges.
But to lay over
or to legitimize online problems just adds
that actual unfettered access and increases social harm.
This is one of the big challenges
that we have with the current bill.
And we believe that this bill legitimizes it,
but also increases that disproportionate harm map.
Maya, one of our social providers here out
of South Auckland, they've all really
provided some insight in terms of problem gambling,
online problem gambling,
and casino, um, harm,
where we see youth staying up all night
having unfettered access.
There's no regulations as they would be in a Class four kind
of machine 'cause it only operates from certain hours.
They've pretty much got unfettered access
and with digital devices as such,
there's no real safeguards in, in our view
that are sufficient enough to protect our community.
Second, we just wanna tack a little bit and,
and kind of raise the issue about gambling being an
actual health issue.
It's framed as a public health issue.
We should treat it like how we treat tobacco,
how we treat alcohol, that it pro it actually implements
substantial harm in our communities.
And in tandem with that is our obligations under,
if we actually dig into the data, Maori are more likely
to be stuck in the cycle of problem gambling.
A Maori more likely at three times more harm,
and also Pacific at two times more harm.
Yet there's nothing in the bill that actually safeguards
or provides preventative measures
to address not only the treaty obligations that we have
to Maori, but also the harm minimization
as this bill provides purports to there.
The last point we just wanna touch on is probably just a
quarter we reject it in its current form.
We understand that oil is one of two nations
that don't have a regulatory framework around this, right?
And we note that, um, when we were looking at it,
when labor was looking at it, it was roughly
around about two or three providers
that we're potentially looking at gambling has never
provided anything to our community.
It never will, right?
But we wanna understand how did this arbitrary figure
of 15 be landed upon
like 15 licensed gambling providers from overseas.
That is, how did we land on 15?
We'd understand that incremental approach, maybe one or two,
but how did we actually land on 1536 overseas,
paid some form of, um, some form of GST to IRD.
So they're already operating out there.
But one thing that we want to land on is
how did we land on 15?
Secondly, Finland, they obviously, they, they, they,
they trialed a monopoly, right?
And if it's revenue generating that we are
after 87% was in their first year,
and yet they eventually, you know, disbanded it.
But we wanted to actually see, look,
if this harm is sufficient, then why don't we try with one
or two at best, right?
One, we're in favor of one, right?
Yeah, it might have had its issues,
but one if, if, if this regulation goes ahead.
Secondly, um, we need that sufficient, um,
monitoring to look after it.
And then thirdly, none of these overseas gambling, um,
people actually pay a problem gaming levy, right?
And if we do in, in the TAB
that sits at 1.24 at a casino machine,
but yet we allow these guys to have unfettered access
to our people and
yet they don't actually make any contributions to community
or the harm, uh, minimization
that the current legislation has for domestic,
uh, people as well.
So that's essentially just in a nutshell what our,
uh, our guest submissions are.
And I'll give, uh, a minute or two for, for,
for Trevor to speak.
But look, we just want to target the license numbers.
Hey, if, if, if it does go ahead
and which it looks like it's going ahead,
have some consistency around the legality of the age,
there is no such provisions to even, you know, offer credit
or, uh, protections around, um, access to times.
They can just pretty much go 24 7.
Um, but I, I just do want to close
before I chuck it over to, to to, um, to Trevor, just
to provide some closing remarks.
Laws Davis, I know, uh, I probably don't know if,
I don't know if you guys are a huge social influencer
in the Maori community, just in general
was offered half a million dollars
to promote online casino gambling.
He turned it down. And I'm incredibly grateful that someone
of that platform, that stature turned out that kind
of money, right?
If someone didn't have the moral result that he had,
would've easily accepted half a million,
but he knew the impacts
and the disproportionate impacts
that it will have on our Maori and communities here in Arto.
That is a sign of things to come.
If we don't get the regulation range, we're not opposed
to regulation, we just reckon it shouldn't be consulted
better, it should be resource better.
It should be ring feeds to equitable groups
who suffer the biggest heart.
So that's it for me. I'll give the closing remarks
to Trevor if we have time.
But yeah, and then that's us.
I'd like to say I'm with three different groups who,
who are gonna be presented.
I'm chairperson of communities
and you heard from Grant, I'm also a board member
of Feed Families, not Pokies who here
with David Hay this afternoon, right?
And I'll wait to hear him, right?
And then I put in my own submission as well, as well
as being with the LEC just to wee bit about things in terms
of, um, a local casino.
It's opened in 1996 on the last 2nd of February, right?
Um, and if I've only been there twice,
but my wife goes there with her cousins, right?
But her to gambled there playing her p she has a
card, got a photo on her, right?
She swipes the card, puts in pin number,
and she go, puts in the money
and she goes with other things, right?
If she's there for five hours, the machine will close down
and tell her to take a 30 minute break.
Now you probably know that, right?
If she's there for longer, I understand six hours,
sorry, after 10 hours, six hours break.
If she's on there in more than 36 hours
and she should be there six hours, um, she's gotta wait
until the next Monday to go and casino again, right?
That sort of thing will not happen under this bill for
the license, 15 license
or three license, whatever it's gonna be, right?
Um, the, um, oh, the other thing is this,
the long term site, anybody can stay in the gaming room up
to 12 hours within any 18 hours period.
So that's, you can see that online.
I said I looked at that this morning
before I came here, right?
So the local casinos have that sort of thing in their,
I disagree with local casinos, right?
I should be more restricted, right?
But that's what they have.
They just online ones won't have that
unless you bring up some regulations, need do it somehow.
And they, um, other thing is that when I,
somebody mentioned earlier on today right?
That they wanted the age to come down
to 18 for everybody, right?
Um, I disagree with that.
I think it should be 20 at least, right? Keep it.
I mean I, for the, for nine months coming in then keep that
to 20 as well, how it's going to be regulated.
I don't know if it's up to you I guess
or other people bit more, um, knowledge than I have
as, as a member of cars.
I'm the local, um, on licenses
and I observe what's going on in terms of, uh, drinking
and the, um, gambling their right.
And you'll see in those ones, you'll see these things here.
I've never seen anyone pick one of these up, right?
I got this from, I think one of this one couple years ago.
Um, but also earlier this morning somebody talked them, oh,
they had to have go into the gambling rooms three times now
to have a, and then they had to, um, record it.
I've sat in one in um, man River
and it's called the Backyard Bar.
They observed it, but they threw from behind the bar.
They didn't go into the room supposed, right?
So what's happening now and in, in New Zealand night
at many places, the then the operators
of these gaming rooms, um, are not adhering
to the regulations, right?
And I think the regulations were is gonna go ahead.
This is is, right? How do we know where they're gonna be?
Um, complete course.
Anyway, yeah. Harry's gonna finish off.
Look, we have um, almost run outta time there, team.
Very, um, very, um, great to hear from you.
I just checked with Melissa if she does have any questions
up to you, if you wanna ask.
That's good. No, it's really interesting. So thank you.
I just wanna say and Asian people as well in terms of
Yeah, yeah. And that
was in the data as well.
You know, there's a three groups.
There's Maori, Pacific and Asia as well.
Hey, you to, to wrap up with with, um, Trevor's point,
self-regulation doesn't really work.
A and 'cause there's no actual
safeguards 'cause it's online.
You are left to your own devices.
That's when the real challenge happens.
And when you check in a young population, like
where we are from with a median age is roughly 24, then,
you know, it really opens up that slippery slope.
So, yeah, we just wanna wish you guys all the best.
Thank you for hearing our submissions from our community.
Thank you MGA for, for your support.
Camilla as well as Melissa,
really appreciate this opportunity to discuss
and yeah, wanna wish you guys all the best
for the remaining submissions.
Thank you so much. Thank you. Thank you.
Taking Yes,
that's, that's okay.
That's, um, that's understandable.
Um, we have a copy of your written submission
and we've got, uh, 10 minutes to hear from you.
Um, so over to you.
Okay. Well, I'm the executive producer of the Christmas
of the Park concert that happened each year in
Auckland and in Christchurch.
We draw about 50,000 on a good
night to each of those centers.
Each concert costs around $750,000
and our major support comes from Coca-Cola.
These concerts have been running for 33 years,
and as I say, Auckland and in Christchurch,
and they're often described
as the largest community events that happen in the country.
In terms of the numbers there.
It certainly is the largest in Christchurch
and maybe the Santa Parade gives us a run in Auckland,
you know, but that Christmas concert is very, very popular.
People attend in family groups from all aspects of society,
from every ethnic and, um, cultural background.
And we found that in the main,
because it's a free entry concert, it has to be free entry.
Otherwise it, you know, people probably wouldn't come.
But it's, um, it,
it's a very sophisticated production on stage.
The band with huge fireworks at the end.
I think some of you may have been in the past.
Yes, they are. Yeah. So you know what I'm talking about.
Yep. Now, the only aspect of the proposed legislation,
I'm not familiar with the whole thing, of course I'm not.
But the only aspect which concerns me is the idea
of there being no responsibility in any new license holders
apparently, to pay funds back into the community
each year via the gaming trusts, which put in a series
of applications to probably get about $150,000 a year
towards, uh, what was really a $2 million budget.
But that $150,000 is essential to us.
Absolutely essential because it says simple things.
One is it is a financial helper.
If you don't have to trim down on fireworks
and things like that, we can present
the show we'd like to present.
More importantly, it represents an acceptance
by the community of these events.
There are, it's quite important
that this be recognized in a national way
and not just laid at the feet of Coca-Cola every year.
Yeah. And the Coca-Cola, you'll be aware,
is sometimes a contentious brand.
Yeah. So that's the different issue.
So that's the only point that I wanted to make.
Of course, we have no interest
or ability to control the offshore gaming licenses
that are being discussed, but the, the fact
that 350 million, I think something like
that goes from these trusts back into community events.
And if that, obviously online gaming will threaten the
existence of the gaming trust incomes at the moment.
You know, and that's, that's just as it is.
But if the, there must be some requirement in my view
that this money be returned to the community, you know,
in a similar, at a similar level to
that which is currently applied to the, um, online game
to the, sorry, the slots trust.
We call 'em the Game trust. Yeah.
So that's about all I have to say. Thank
You, uh, Melissa.
Uh, thank you.
Uh, I have to say I have been a fan over the years.
I probably attended virtually every one of them.
Um, um,
but, um, in terms of the sponsorship, apart from co,
Coca-Cola obviously doesn't actually fund everything
that you actually do for Christmas.
So what do you have to go to many different, um, um, C four,
uh, class four operators
to actually get the funding? Or do you just go to
Actually just, or you use the market bit,
but, I'm sorry. Sorry.
Yeah. Uh, obviously Coca-Cola doesn't pay
for a hundred percent of the production, uh,
of Christmas in the pack.
Yeah. So do you go to many C four class, um, um,
gaming trusts to actually get, um, funding for the
No, we actually only, we limited to apply to about five
or six trusts because some of them have regulations.
They've gotta go to sporting interests
or maybe even horse racing.
I'm not sure what it is these days, you know,
but the ones that we can fit into community cultural events,
uh, concerts, you know, um, they, uh, five
or six Line Foundation, trillion Trust Foundation North,
which doesn't fall into your area.
Um, oh, in, in Dunedin.
So about five or six
of these trusts who've been regularly
supporting us over the years.
The other aspect of these concerts, which is essential,
I'd hate to see them threatened
by this proposed legislation.
I can't say whether they will be or not,
but the aspect that's really important is we are
so engaged with the community.
We have auditions every year in Christchurch and in Aland,
and this is the largest stage that our young singers,
dancers, and instrumentalists will ever appear
on in their lives.
They're emerging talent.
And it gives of tremendous encouragement.
'cause our professional singers and dancers
and musician, um, mentor them
through in their first stage appearance.
So each year we have about 100 new, young,
talented New Zealanders appearing on our stage.
And it's launched many careers.
I could think of one particular Haley Westerner,
it was her first time she ever stayed in public.
She'd been around the world a great success.
Lots of people like that, you know?
Thank you. Thank you. Yeah. I'm also a fan.
Um, I was surprised though to see was the trust.
So obviously there were concerts happening before 2007,
but the trust was formed in
2000. Um, sorry, I didn't
understand the question.
Can you use the mic too a
Bit? Yeah. In, in your
submission, you had the,
the trust being formed in 2007.
Yes. Um, was
The domain conscious trust.
Yeah. There were concerts before that though.
No. Or they were de
That was formed with a specific purpose
of applying to the gaming truck.
Oh, okay. Some of them need
to have charity application
applications from charities, you know?
Mm-hmm. So we, that was formed with
that one purpose in Mind, just
to raise bunch funds in support
of these concerts in Auckland and in Christchurch.
I see. Thank you. And, um, just have
to put this in the submission such
as the regard in which these consciousness are the then four
mayors of Auckland were our trustees,
and that says something about the value
of the community, places on these things. Yeah.
Thank you. Thanks. No questions longer? No. Okay.
Well, thank you so much for again, and, um, cheers.
Thanks for speaking with us.
Okay. All right. Now we suspend until one 30,
Daniel and Louise.
Uh, we've got a copy of your Russian submission
and we've got 10 minutes set aside
to hear your oral submission.
So you're welcome to use as much of that time as you like.
We'll leave some time for questions at the
end. Over to you. Thank you.
Great. Thank you so much for having us.
So we, uh, represent the beautification trust.
So we're a social enterprise based in South Auckland,
and we're all about connecting
and empowering communities to learn love
and look after the environment.
And we will take our submission as being read.
So today I just wanted to share a little bit more of a,
a backstory actually, um, to help, um, you know, really, um,
firm up our position as,
as is noted in the, in the submission.
So I have actually been in the fundraising sector now
for coming up around about 23 years.
And I just wanted to share with you a little bit about, um,
some of the things that I've seen in that space.
And, uh, it's been across quite a
few different organizations.
So I've been involved at, at World Vision, um,
and many various different fundraising roles.
I've been at, uh, Oxfam and,
and quite a senior fundraising role there,
overseeing a large team.
And I've been at, um, other organizations, smaller ones such
as Variety, the Children's Charity,
and also, um, larger organizations such
as Presbyterian Support Northern, which offers a whole range
of different social services across a whole range
of different brands, as well as, um, being on the board
of Vision West Community Trust,
and at the moment being, um, board chair there.
But at the moment, I'm,
I'm representing the beautification trust here.
But I think it's really helpful just
to set the scene in terms of those years
of experience in the fundraising space.
Is that, um,
and it's, it's very, very hard going in
that fundraising space,
and I've seen it across these 20 plus years in terms of
it's increasingly more
and more difficult to secure funding
for the really important mahi that not-for-profits do.
And there's examples where, you know, it's been almost like
a nail in the coffin and so many different fronts.
So, for example, direct mail is one of the,
the key fundraising channels that used
to be just in thriving in terms of number of responses
that you'd get from a direct mail campaign
and with, you know, the changes with New Zealand post
and, uh, the, the everyone moving to digital
that's really dried up.
And then you think about in terms of event fundraising,
and we had so many different events across the, the,
the decades, and they were, you know, making, you know,
huge amounts of, of, of funds
for really important not-for-profit work.
And a lot of those have dried up as well.
And I think case in point, um, a couple of years
after I left Oxfam, the Oxfam Trail Walker, you know, a walk
that had been running for, for many decades,
uh, was, was canceled.
And that's across the board across
many different organizations.
And it, and it kind of been helped with COVID and, and,
and that side of things too.
So even the likes of individual giving,
which is more like your sponsorship type programs, um,
those have also been really, really struggling.
Like even though there's growth in those areas, the cost
of fundraise for for particular programs
around individual giving has really, really
ramped up in terms of how much it actually costs
to bring on a new supporter of a, of a trust
or a not-for-profit.
So I think in summary, with all of these different
fundraising channels, every single one
of them almost has become more
and more difficult to be able to secure funds
for not-for-profits, and they're amazing mahi.
So I think in terms of the, the link then to this, it's just
so, um, disappointing if, if we were
to see it go ahead without that 40% of, um, of
funds, uh, secured
through these new licenses being
reinvested back into community.
And I referenced something that Blackboard, um, who, um,
a really strong organization who really support, um,
fundraising and they do a state of,
of fundraising report each year.
And in May, 2025, they said, as part of their key findings,
all sectors shared the current economic
as their number one fundraising concern.
And participants who experienced a decline in their revenue
cited this as the main reason, followed by fewer donors
and adequate resources and lower gift values.
So it is really, really tough out there.
And what I've also found is that, you know,
for a fundraiser, they typically stay in the role
for less than two years.
And so I just really wanted to,
and felt compelled to,
to bring in a little bit more in terms of the, the breadth
of what I've seen over the last couple of decades in terms
of how, uh, this potential, um, approach, if, if the, um,
matching of, of it to what the current state is
with the 40% back to, um,
not-for-profits isn't, isn't held up.
So I think too, in, in, in sum, up to across these,
these many years in, in this space,
we often have mps like yourself coming to our,
our different organizations.
And typically that conversation goes, oh, wow, it's amazing
what, what, what work you do in your organization
and we really value it
and we couldn't do it without, without you.
And, um, sometimes what comes up in those conversations
as well is, well, um, is there anything more that we
as mps could do for you?
And I think, uh, often that what comes up in, in
that space is, um, we are really struggling with funding,
and I think this actually has a real tangible link back to
that in terms of, in a cost neutral way to mean that, um,
more, um, well, um, an adequate level
of funds is retained back through these grants through
to community organizations,
and meaning that actually it's not going in reverse the
other way in terms of the double nail, um, in the coffin
with, um, having traditional pokies in decline anyway,
as well as these new online, um, um, gambling opportunities
to mean that there is less
invested back in that way as well.
So we really strongly believe in our position around this
and that we really support that, um,
there is more community benefit given
and that it's a really strong fear
and consistent regulation so that the likes of us
and the applications that Louise puts in for us for funding
mean that it's, um, it's, we're able to continue
to secure funding through those routes.
Anything to add Louise?
Uh, no. Nothing specific to add, just to talk
what Daniel has said.
And, um, yeah, just really support the,
the focus on if we are gonna have, um, you know,
gambling regulation in this country that the offset
of the social harm from gambling, um, should remain.
Um, and, and so that's an area for improvement in this bill.
Um, yeah, I think we are open to questions, so
Thank you, uh, Laga.
Um, thank you for your presentation.
Um, and I'll declare that I've been to all
of your activities, um,
because there's such a high intake of schools, uh,
right across diverse audiences, ages, et cetera,
and just the, the output.
My question is just around the licenses,
'cause you've put in your written submission, um, five
to 15 licenses are reserved for community interest
and then have heard the community benefit.
Do you wanna just expand on that little bit more?
So that was the second point. The second
Point, Yeah.
Um, so that was, uh, just based on, um,
some advice that we had with the, uh, class four sector.
Um, just that, that was reserved
for nonprofit organizations.
So some of the ones that we work with, for example,
in our area, are Trillion Trust.
So they manage a lot of the gaming venues in our area,
and that just ensures that their purpose, um, is
for the community, uh,
and it's not for profit necessarily. Yeah.
And just a quick sip on that.
And do you think, um, with the involvement
of schools right across South Auckland,
but I saw in that last event you actually had schools
across Auckland mm-hmm.
In the wearable art and the environment initiatives.
Uh, do you think that the recipients of all
of your different initiatives across, do they, uh,
would they understand that the they bulk of funding, um,
scrums the different organizations for not-for-profit?
So the bulk of the funding?
Yeah, so the bulk
of our funding doesn't come from these grants.
Um, we have a quite a diverse mix
of different income streams to help us, um,
I guess stay financially sustainable.
Um, so I would say it in terms of the charity sector,
we wouldn't be, um, like one
of the greatest recipients of that, uh, gaming funding.
But, um, but we do support the ability
for organizations like ours
and organizations that are smaller
or might rely more heavily on gaming funding, um, to be able
to benefit from online gambling, um,
funds if, if they're available.
Yeah. Yeah.
I think what you might also find is that, um, a lot
of not-for-profits are like hand to mouth just trying
to keep the lights on.
So they will not necessarily be, um, have the resource
to even attend and oral submission
and have the time to do that.
So we feel like we're actually, you know,
carrying a little bit of that for other organizations
that we know of who are our friends in the sector as well.
So, um, yeah, it's really important that, that we share
that voice, I guess not just on behalf of us,
but also on others in the sector.
Thank you so much. We have, um, run out of time now,
but thank you so much for coming in, um, for the work
that you do and for, um, your submission today.
Thank you. Thank you. Yeah.
Next submission is Port Welcome.
Yeah. You, you've seen, um, the previous submission. Yes.
But we've got 10 minutes for your submission.
You are welcome to use as much as that time as you'd like.
Um, we'll leave some time for questions over to you.
Thank you very much. Uh, well, firstly, Koto, uh, uh,
my name's, uh, Matthew Cooper, the Chief Executive
of Sport Waikato, uh,
sport Waikato supports Waikato Regional Sports
Organizations, clubs, and Community Sport across our region.
Um, firstly thank you to the select committee, uh,
for your mahi and the opportunity to speak to you.
Uh, this afternoon. Message is simple.
The principle that gambling must benefit the community has
been at the heart of public acceptance for 50 years.
The bill risks removing it, this must change
why Sport Waikato doesn't receive any class
for funding directly,
but the Waikato regional sports organizations
and clubs we support rely heavily on it for uniforms,
for facilities, for coaches, for travel,
for events without these grants.
Participation costs rise, services are cut,
and opportunities for them
to create sport opportunities shrink, especially for Tamari,
Ranga, Tahi, Maori, uh, women and girls and disabled people,
and low income families,
which is a massive target audience of sport.
Kaul already clubs face pressures from inflation,
inflation reduced local government investment
and declining sponsorship and volunteer burnouts.
Many are stretched to breaking point.
So the risk of the OCG bill is drafted.
It excludes the community benefit principle,
a major depart the departure from previous legislation,
including the Gambling Act of 2003.
The market has shifted quickly.
Class four pokies contributed 300 hundred
and 45 million in community grants in
2024 across New Zealand.
But the 800 million online gambling mark market is growing
at 18% per year and overtaking it.
If revenue shifts online without obligations
for community return, the grassroots sport
and charities will be left behind.
The risks is that profits flow offshore while Kiwi
communities who bear the social cost get nothing in return.
The case for community benefit
is community return is not an, is not optional,
it's the social contract that has enabled gambling
to be accepted in New Zealand.
For the past 50 years, every iteration
of gambling law has carried the principle.
It is not credible or fair to exclude it.
Now over 5,000 public submissions,
the vast majority in support reinforce
that this is a mainstream expectation.
So recommend three key changes.
Firstly, to embed the principle explicitly state on in the
bill that gambling should be, uh,
should benefit the community.
A percentage of gambling should, um,
should benefit the community, require a share
of online gambling revenue, set a proportion comparable
to the Class four system, ensure fear
and transparent distribution.
So that is the adapting existing mechanisms.
So regional sports organizations, clubs can continue
to apply directly for funding.
And, and perhaps I should state,
I'm not just talking about sport, uh,
the previous submitter as well.
This is not about propping up dependency,
it's about sustaining community infrastructure
that delivers health, wellbeing, youth development,
and social cohesion every day.
So finally, to the committee, um, uh,
the bill is a defining moment, if we get it wrong, the shift
to online gambling, we'll drain the lifeblood
of community sport
and charities throughout the
Waikato, throughout New Zealand.
If we get it right, we future proof the social contract
for the next 50 years.
Please amend the bill to ensure
that gambling profits continue to benefit the communities
who need it most nu
Thank you very much for your submission.
Um, just check to see if colleagues have questions.
I just had a question, um, to start with around, uh,
I think you've made a strong point
around community contribution.
Yeah. Um, we've had some comments from other submitters
around, uh, things like harm reduction.
Um, have you, do you have any comments
to make on other aspects apart from, uh,
the community contribution?
Or is that the kind of the main focus of, of, um,
what you would like us to take away from your
Certainly acknowledge your concerns and,
and where you are pitching that, um, that question.
Um, it mines more about community
that we're already under strain,
and I think that's the aspect which we know that this has a,
has it has been applied.
And all I'm saying for if we don't do that,
there is gonna be a further drain on community sport.
Sport and recreation is a, is, is is the lifeblood.
We, it's a real, real important DNA of New Zealanders.
And it's a very, and I'm not just talking about
supporting and propping sport.
I'm talking about the benefits from
playing sport and recreation.
Yeah. Melissa, I, um, so thank you for your submission.
We appreciate, um, in terms, it,
it was interesting to, to see that you sent a percentage
of the gambling money should return to the community.
There's been a lot of people who've actually been calling
for 40% of the online casino money
because that's what C four does.
Yep. The issue that I actually struggle with
or, um, have to think about is
that casinos don't actually return that percentage.
'cause it's actually a for profit.
They have a presence here.
Uh, online gambling, uh,
online casinos will have a different, um, sort
of percentage they have to, you know,
for whether it's actually leese licenses, uh, taxes, all of
that stuff is also gonna be quite different as well.
So what do you think should happen,
because it seems to be Casino has one role,
C four has another role online gambling has
another, what do you question?
Yeah, I mean, I, I, I don't think it's every,
I don't think it's perfect what, what,
whatever the system is, but I just think
with the C four opportunities that there is,
that is a process which I've experienced over my time
in sport and recreation.
Uh, Melissa, which I, I believe has, it has some structure
behind it, and it seems to be working that 40% seems
to work in a way that, uh, is fair
and equitable across these,
across the system in terms of delivery.
So that's why I think we've got a system in terms
of class four, and that's the, that's that percentage,
which I believe should be factored into
any decision going forward.
Just a probably final question from me,
and this ger who has one?
Mm-hmm. Um, in terms of the funding, uh, for sport
and appreciate you're a Regionwide sporting organization,
do you have any reflections on how that is now compared to,
you know, in recent history?
Uh, in terms of is it more difficult now or is it
Absolutely. Yeah. I, I
would say expand, I would say
through to you this chair.
I'd say that the, um, the challenges now, um,
our organization, for example,
through local governments really now is
finding it very difficult.
Um, we could tell the clubs to raise money that is even
and, and get sponsorship.
That's a really challenge now in terms of the market.
Um, so there's an aspect around something
that has been embedded for 50 years that we believe, um,
if we, there is a risk here, if it was to, if,
if this bill was to go through.
So we just think there is a proportion there
that's really important to the fabric
of New Zealand society. Thank you.
Okay. Thank you so much. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Thanks very much. Appreciate that.
Our next submitter is BX New Zealand. Thank you. Welcome.
We've got Christopher and Samantha
Kira. Welcome
Kira Tel.
Um, thank you very much for the
opportunity to speak to you today.
Um, my name's Chris Gr, um,
and I'm joined by Samantha, uh, Jones here
and, uh, respectively.
We are the, uh, chair
and the executive officer for BMX New Zealand.
Um, we are the, um, governing body for the sport
of BMX racing in New Zealand.
So we represent 32 clubs around the country, roughly 3000,
uh, licensed riders, et cetera,
and covering every region in, in the country.
Um, I'm here today on behalf of not just the governing body,
but actually all of those members and all
those clubs, et cetera.
Um, we started in 1970s, um, uh,
in reasonably informal and increasingly have, uh,
and over time in the, from the early eighties, um,
we've clubs formed
and formalized racing happened, et cetera.
And the sport has continued to develop right the way through
to 2008, where we actually became an
Olympic discipline for the first time.
So, you know, a mainstream sport
for once, which is quite nice.
Um, we are the only cycling code
where we have structured
participation from primary school age.
So we are the entry point for, uh,
for cycling codes around the country.
Um, we are the gateway community also for, um,
for recreation and structured sport for many young people.
Um, our events and our facilities
that we put on are really the first step into, um,
healthy activity community events
and a lifelong, um, love of movement.
Um, and we very much, um, adhere to the sport nz sort
of everybody, everybody in action, everybody moving kind
of, uh, philosophy.
Um, BMX obviously, um, probably came true as coming
to prominence because of its, uh, it's now an Olympic sport,
but actually the, the, the vast majority of our, um,
of our activity is at the grassroots level
as it's starting from primary school level, right the way up
to our oldest rider I think are in the eighties now,
which is, which is wonderful to see,
and a very much a family oriented sport.
Um, we are, as I said, the proven feeder
for all the other cycling disciplines.
So all the Olympians you see in mountain biking and track
and road, et cetera.
Almost all of them started at some point on A BMX bike
'cause it's the most accessible.
But despite being a grassroots sport
and now an Olympic discipline,
we currently receive no funding from the government for our,
um, for activities.
We don't, we do not receive funding
through, through cycling New Zealand.
We don't receive, um, funding from Sport NZ
or High Performance Sport New Zealand.
So we are entirely, um, self-managed in, in that regard.
Um, we've looked well, we, we try
and seek funding from a variety of sources, um,
from corporate sponsorship, but we are a minority sport.
We don't get broadcast coverage, et cetera, so we're not
that attractive to, to mainline sponsors, et cetera.
We've looked at can we get more from our, from our riders,
um, contributing more to run their sport.
But we are a very heavily blue collar,
dominated a sport and activity.
Um, there isn't a lot of money to go around.
Um, and we are concerned that if we
increase the burden on the rider base, we'll just,
just reduce per um, participation.
So with that in mind, you know,
we are very conscious of our costs.
We are an almost exclusively volunteer based,
um, organization.
Everything we do from the grassroots right the way up to,
um, managing the high performance teams, et cetera,
is done on a volunteer basis and self-funded.
So we try and keep our costs down
to an absolute bare minimum.
Um, but regardless, we are heavily
reliant on community-based funding to, for our sport
to operate and to grow each year.
B-M-X-N-Z is a national body,
receives about $300,000 in community grants.
Each of our clubs also, um,
is reliant on local community boards as well.
And that's to do things that are really non-discretionary,
where our funding goes to pay for things like ambulances,
um, first aid, traffic management, health
and safety, things that you can't skimp on, things
that you can't do, uh, you can't just do yourself.
You actually do need to invest in, um,
we spend our money on those things.
We spend our money on technology, timing, equipment
and, uh, things to help people get into the sport.
So bikes that people can use, um, transponders for timing,
safety gear for riders to be able to use, to be able
to get into the, into the sport, um,
with minimum costs, et cetera.
We've invested pretty heavily in self health
and safety in first aid, in protect, in,
in coach development, in rider development, um,
and supporting our clubs along the way as well.
Um, we really focus
on making, um, active recreation
and sport access to families.
Um, and a lot of our families are facing financial hardship.
Um, then as I said, they're not the, not necessarily the,
the wealthiest, um, part of the socioeconomic,
uh, spectrum of New Zealand.
Um, but they're very passionate.
They want their kids to do well.
They want their kids to have opportunities,
and we are there to help and help 'em get there.
Our facilities and the events that we put on,
and we put on roughly 50 events a year across the country,
um, at a national level.
Um, and then, uh, every club is putting on, um,
an event every, uh, at least twice a week as well.
So there's a lot of activity going on,
but those things are more than just places to ride.
They're safe, inclusive,
and accessible spaces that just support youth development,
active recreation, community connection,
and they really become, um, the focal point for volunteering
and community spirit, growing families
and supporters from around the country.
It's, there are very few sporting activities
where teenagers are happily spend a weekend
with their parents in a tent along alongside a dusty track.
Um, that's, it's really is quite unique
and it really is a family, um, uh,
a family experience since COVID.
Um, we worked really, really hard
to rebuild our membership base,
which dropped off significantly during the pandemic.
And, um, we are now back up
to our pre COVID levels experience an 8% growth year on year
from our ridership members last
year, but we're not done yet.
Um, we've got some big ideas for BMX.
Um, we really want to be able, able
to invest in better facilities, um, to equip our rider
to compete here in New Zealand, but also to compete overseas
and, and represent their country.
Um, we really have plans to, um, further enhance access
to the, to the community safety participation.
And we really want to work in con in partnership
with the councils and local community boards to,
to deliver these future projects, which won't get delivered
unless, uh, unless we can find funding.
Um, we're not here today to debate the harms
of gambling gambling's here to stay.
Um, realistically, uh, we are never going to be able
to legislate gambling away.
Um, it is a, a factor of our, of our society,
but whether it's at the pub, the casino online, um, uh,
we can only do what we can do.
And we, and, and what we can do is
what we've done in New Zealand for decades.
And to ensure some good comes of it,
community funding sourcing from gambling has enabled sports
like ours to deliver real positive outcomes, safe spaces,
healthy activities and opportunities for people of all ages
to find connection and purpose.
In our case, this, this funding isn't just offset harm,
it's created something profoundly good
building community resilience and pride in, uh, in, in,
in many, many communities.
A lot of them rural, a lot of them, um, underserved,
taking away the opportunity, um, uh,
for something positive come from gambling we think we'd be
at, would be counterproductive.
Not just from community groups facing financial pressure,
but even for those struggling with gambling itself,
who may find connection
and purpose through the bay activities.
The funding supports without the funding that comes through,
um, online or through through the gambling pieces.
Um, our sport
and many last likers will face
some pretty difficult decisions.
We list losing the very programs
and facilities that keep young people,
communities engaged, active and safe.
We'd risk losing the momentum we built
and the community spirit that drives us.
So we respectfully, we asked for four things.
Number one, to embed in the build the principle from the
gambling act 2003, that gambling
should benefit the community.
Two require that zy casino operators contribute a portion
of their revenue to community funding, prioritizing youth
and au based, um,
or au focused recreation of sports, recognize community,
recreation and sport as essential social infrastructure.
And number four, support con continuity
for existing programs during any transition.
Our story is, is one of, um, resilience,
local partnership and positive impact.
Let's ensure that future generations can, can continue
to benefit the from the power of community,
recreation and sport.
Nah, noi, thanks for, thanks for that
and welcome any questions. Thank
You. We do have a couple of
minutes left
for questions I'll just check with, uh, colleagues,
but I do have a question.
Um, two, two questions really.
I was interested in what you said about being in, uh,
Olympic sport that doesn't receive government funding,
and I wanted to know whether that was unusual.
The second question, if we, um, uh, have time is that, um,
you said that things are becoming increasingly more
difficult for you recently,
and I just wanted to know, um, if you had any theories as to
as to why that that could be.
Sure, uh, probably ask, answer the second one first.
Yeah, sure. Um, and Sam feel, to feel free to chip in here,
um, there are fewer community grants available,
so fewer grant organizations that we can apply to.
And the ones that we do that we can apply
to have less money, they're just not
as affluent as they used to be.
They're not as, uh, they're not making the returns on their
investments, et cetera, therefore
there is less money to go around.
Um, typically we would, um, a good example,
we have our North Island championships, um, coming up, uh,
in next month typically we would be able
to source grant funding to cover, um,
things like the ambulance,
things like the traffic management, et cetera.
Um, the things that we can't get away from that have
to be there, uh,
this year is the first year we have not been able
to receive a single grant to cover those expenses.
So those are entirely coming out of the coffers
of BMX New Zealand and through increased entry fees, um,
which potentially, um, will impact the number of riders
who can actually show up.
So yes, it's getting much tougher.
We're not let, we're not sitting on our, on our laurels,
et cetera, thinking woe is me.
So we are making active, um, uh, attempts
to find corporate sponsorship, et cetera, but it's tough.
Businesses are not as, uh, um,
or are probably more cash poor than they have been.
Um, we get very few nos where we said,
come see us in a couple of years when things,
when hopefully things will be a bit better.
We don't have a big television base
or mass media piece to advertise through, et cetera.
We built a live streaming program, um,
which gets a few thousand views, et cetera.
So our, our ability to be attractive to those people is,
is limited because we're a a a, we are a minority code
with a minority following.
In terms of the not receiving government funding for this,
um, no, I'm not sure that's, that's particularly unusual.
Um, there is only so much money to go around.
There are a lot of sporting codes out there.
Um, how the money is is divvied up once it gets
to the National Sporting Organization.
Um, is, is really, you know,
um, a bit of an art in the science.
I think so no, it's not particularly unusual, um, for our,
at the top end of our, of our athletes, the ones
who are competing at the world level,
the World Cups, et cetera.
Um, it really is self-funded and bank of mom
and dad, which limits limb see ability
to potentially get our best
athletes representing the country.
Thank you. We have run out of time now,
but thank you so much, um, for coming in today
for your submission and for answering your questions.
Thank you. Thank you. The next submitter is Bowles
New Zealand,
Mark Cameron.
Yes. Welcome 10 minutes, um, for your submission
and we do have a, a copy that we've been able
to have a look out of your written submission.
Thank you. Thanks to you. Thank you.
Thanks for the members present, uh,
for the opportunity to speak.
Um, as you know, my name's Mark Cameron.
I'm CEO of Bowles, New Zealand.
Uh, the Bowles community in New Zealand
represents 456 bowling clubs,
198,000 participants,
43,000 playing full playing membership at bowling clubs,
17,000, uh, Ranu, Tahi and Tamaki.
Uh, and is a, is a strong part of our community and,
and what makes our community healthy.
Um, if there's, there are some codes, there are some sports
that, that can probably say they benefited from COVID-19.
There's not many things that benefited from COVID Ovid 19,
but coming out of COVID, um, I think
what we see we saw was a real sense of community, uh,
and people getting together
and wanting to actually mix and mingle.
And that's where our sports clubs, uh,
are very important part of, of the community.
Um, our community prioritizes inclusion
and importantly mental health.
It's amazing what a glass of wine, a game of bowls
and some friends do to alleviate stress, anxiety,
loneliness, depression, uh,
and with a hun with a history of over 150 years.
Um, and that established presence in our communities.
Our 456 clubs, our community hubs,
the Bowles community uses this,
this the current class four funding, uh, for such purposes
as a new lawnmower, a replacement roof for their building
bowls, equipment for our run Tahi programs.
A replacement artificial green, primarily items
that are over capital nature
and can't, that can't be replaced by volunteer time.
The social contract government has had
with our community hubs for decades is
to support club volunteer activities
by having access to this class four, uh,
revenue stream circa approximately three 50 million per
annum as I understand it.
Introducing this bill, the minister
and DIA have labeled our communities, uh,
and our volunteers dependent on this social contract.
Um, I'm not sure that any government wants to label a bunch
of volunteers dependent.
Uh, if anything, I think New Zealand owes
those volunteers a debt of gratitude and service, um,
because they are what makes our communities, um, places
where wellbeing thrives.
Uh, the online, um, gaming bill, um,
the Bowles community are, are supportive of the intent,
which is to levy online gambling.
It makes sense as we move into this artificial digital
world, we are sadly alone.
Screen time is becoming the norm.
It makes sense that we would, um, levy that area.
We know that we cannot stop the movement to online gambling
in the same way as we could not stop the movement to the TAB
or lotto apps over visiting a local TAB
outlet or lotto outlet.
It absolutely makes sense.
The government would legislate the online gambling sector,
however, to do so and it,
and ignore the impact
that this will have on existing class four beneficiaries,
we believe is disrespectful.
It disrespects the tens of thousands in our communities
that rely on this funding to do their job, which is
to service the community.
And when I say do their job, this is a volunteer job.
If you take away this income stream, then we are further
burdening those community volunteers with responsibility
for funding, um, to the amount to, um,
near 350 million per annum, um,
for the benefit of the community.
So we are like, we're,
we're gonna burden our volunteers, uh, with this.
Um, these people are bo are volunteers.
They're not businesses.
All of my bowling clubs, uh, all
of our community volunteer their time.
They do not get paid and often sadly get little thanks.
Our solution is simple.
These online, uh, operators need
to directly contribute a percentage of their revenue back
to the very communities, uh, that have them
as their customers.
Um, we need to carve out a percentage of the, um,
the online revenue, um, so that it goes back
to our local community.
And we believe the existing class four framework, um, is,
uh, worthy, uh, is is the one we should carry on, um,
with in terms of distributing this money.
Let's continue this decades old social contract
between government and our community
and not disrespect the many volunteers
that make New Zealand and our community.
Great. I thank the members for their time
and willingness to listen to our concerns.
I'm happy to answer any questions.
Thank you. Uh, I'll just checked police
to see if they have any questions.
Um, I one, uh, LA did you?
Yeah, LA Oh, you go first. No, no, you go first.
Thank you for your submission and your written submission.
I'm curious to ask about the bowling clubs.
Do you see the volunteer capacity they're getting older in
terms of joining a local bowling club
and expanding your services?
And here you loud and clear
around the community benefit. Yep.
Um, well first of all, volunteers, uh,
are getting harder and harder to find.
Um, but in terms of our community, we pride ourselves in
that this is our niche, is that older demographic, um, which
by the way have the biggest health bill.
Um, so it's really important that we, that we have, um,
that older demographic being looked after and supported and,
and importantly, um, uh, enjoying the company
of others in their, in our communities.
And just a quick supplement. Yeah.
How diverse are you seeing that community?
Um, it's, it represents New Zealand, so, so in terms
of the general demographics, we are probably not as strong
as we could be in terms of recent immigrants.
Um, appreciating Bowles is probably more
of a commonwealth type sport.
Um, but certainly in terms of um, ethnicity, uh, in terms
of um, uh, age, gender, um, we are um,
I guess represent New Zealand in terms
of those numbers. Thank you
Just said, um, you probably hit the last submission,
but uh, in terms of New Zealand's been quite
successful with bowling.
Yep. Um, so historically in terms of um, um,
worldwide competitions and uh, Olympics
and Commonwealth Game.
Commonwealth Game, yep. What support do you get from, uh,
apart, you know, apart from the grants from the
government or sport New Zealand?
Well, I think that either two different, I mean, um,
the grants we can't use for
that high performance and that high performance space.
Right. Okay. Um, so we're well aware of that
and neither do we want to, I think
that money should be going back into our local communities.
Um, but do we do benefit from some funding from High
Performance Sport New Zealand and Sport New Zealand?
Um, is it ever enough? No.
But um, we are blessed for what we have.
Okay. Thank you so much for coming in. Appreciate that.
So my son was a bowler. This what
It's, he did long balls at school
and he was the captain of the long balls team.
Fantastic. Our next, um, submitter is the Cancer Society
of Auckland, Auckland Division.
Juliet, thank you. Welcome.
We have got a copy of your written submission
and 10 minutes for your oral submission. So over here.
Thanks so much. Well, as you know,
my name is Juliet Hawkes Wood
and I'm here to talk to you on behalf
of the Auckland Northland Division of the Cancer Society.
We've been supporting people affected by cancer
for over 90 years.
And, uh, I'm really wanting to just establish
that we are here to say that we have a strong opposition
to the bill in its current form.
I think our, the reasons that are very similar to some
of the other groups you've already heard from,
we are very concerned that we must not put at risk
of vital funding that our community has come to rely on.
Um, but before I talk a little bit more about the impact on
us, I just want to briefly outline the value that we bring
to the community so you can see
how well those funds are currently being spent.
The Cancer Society provides essential services such as
transport to treatment through
our volunteer driving service.
We have 13 community nurses across Auckland
and more in Northland
who support cancer patients in their own home.
We have some fantastic health psychologists
and our psychology team who provide free emotional support
for people who are suffering from grief,
anxiety over the cancer diagnosis.
Uh, and we also have our free accommodation at domain lodge
just up the road here where I've come from today
where we support cancer patients traveling to Auckland,
primarily from Northland,
where unfortunately people are still having to come down
to Auckland for treatment,
although that is slowly improving.
Uh, so that it's, we are in a substantial organization,
but that means we need a lot of money to function.
Um, unlike some health organizations, we receive
virtually no government funding at all.
We get a very little bit through the National Travel
Assistance Fund for some of those patients,
but primarily our revenue comes from support base.
We get money from people from their legacy
and their gifts and their legacy.
We have individual donors who give us money every month.
Um, and we have community grants.
Community funding is a really big
important part of our revenue.
We get around $550,000 a year from community community
grants around between 40
and 60% of that comes via p machines.
That's around $300,000 a year.
To put that in perspective,
'cause you might go, oh, okay, well hey,
that's not much we'll at your total expenditure,
but we've still gotta replace that
with something that's the rub.
So to give you a sense of how that would look, we've got,
we'd have to get another thousand individuals in Auckland
giving us $30 a month.
We target 4,000 new individual givers a year,
and we are struggling to reach that target if we had
to add another thousand onto that.
It really is not practical,
particularly in the current economic environment.
The other way of looking at this, we'd have
to sell a lot of cakes.
Anecdotally, I believe a cake stand might raise of $600.
We'd have to be running a couple
of cake stands every year forever to replace that money.
So it, it is really important to us
and we don't take it lightly.
I'm the trust and foundations manager,
which means I apply for all those grants.
Every single grant we get. That's my job.
I love to tell our stories and they are heartfelt.
So to let you know how
that community has been supporting us,
the gambling community
for Winds Foundation gave us $50,000 towards putting aircon
units into our rooms at Domain Lodge.
You can imagine what it's like in the muggy summer
for people undergoing chemotherapy.
It's pretty uncomfortable. That was only for 25 rooms.
We've still got another 25 rooms to go.
Pub Charity gives us money
for our social worker in Northland who visits people right
through remote communities in very, very deprived areas
of Northland, helping them with housing, helping them
through food vouchers and to apply for Benefits.
Lion Foundation, of course, I wouldn't want
to forget them in Auckland.
They've been supporting our nurses for many, many years.
So we are incredibly grateful
and reliant on that funding in its current bill
in its current form, big fund.
The bill allows on online platforms
to operate without any requirement
to contribute to community grants.
This not only jeopardizes the funding
for our essential services
and all those other amazing charities around New Zealand,
but I believe that it also under, it underpins the trust
that our community has in gambling regulations.
I think one of our earliest speakers, um, talked about that,
that, you know, people, they're not that comfortable
with gambling and we all know that it happens,
but when we hear that a lot of that money is going back
to the community, it warms our heart up just a little bit
and it makes us feel better.
And if that's not happening through online platforms,
it just feels like another Google, another Amazon,
another big international tech businesses may be profiting
from that need that some people have
to risk their financial situation in order to gain more
for lives, which are actually pretty desperate anyway.
So community organizations across New Zealand really do rely
on these gaming proceeds to fund critical services.
They're not luxuries these services, they're lifelines.
They enable us to support people who might
otherwise be left without help.
The proposed legislation threatens
to divert funds away from these services
at a time when demand is increasing.
And we are finding people's lives are
very, very complicated.
Unfortunately, cancer is increasing just from our own
organization's perspective.
The need is huge and growing.
28,000 people a year are diagnosed with cancer
and this is predicted to double by 2040.
So we do ask very sincerely
and respectfully, we urge the committee
to embed in the bill the principle
that gambling should benefit the community
and continue to do so.
It's not a radical proposal, it's a continuation
of the principles that have been guiding the community
gaming in New Zealand for decades.
Actually. I did a little bit of research and I was astounded
and proud, immensely proud to find that New Zealand is one
of the only countries in the world
that currently has this model
of funding from gambling into community sector.
There are a couple of other countries, Croatia,
I think it was Bosnia, uh, hey, where's everybody else?
We have been leaders in progressive legislation
and for a long time, why would we throw that away now?
It would be so regressive to do that.
So that makes me proud and I really hope that it continue.
Um, I, I think if I've got time, I've got a suggestion
around how we could actually facilitate, um, that process
of getting the funding from the online
companies into New Zealand.
But I leave that
and just in case you've got questions I'll just wrap up
by saying we oppose the bill is proposed.
We really want to ensure that
that funding remains available our, for our community
and anything as less will undermine the support for very,
very vulnerable New Zealanders. So
Thank you. Thank you. Thank
you so much.
Um, just checking for questions.
I didn't have a question, but more of a comment.
I had visited the facility that you do have in Auckland
and just, um, thank you
for your incredible work that you do do there.
I know it's, um, dealing with people at some
of the toughest time of their life,
but it's I know so valued by the family.
Thank you. And a lot of those people are from Northland
and we really toko Northland
because it's got its own very, very special issues up there.
Cancer and Maori communities is much, much higher prevalence
and much lower rates of recovery.
So that's why we have an equity strategy whereby we have
been putting a lot more funding that we need
to keep finding, um, into that community.
That's why we have our Maori social worker.
We work with Kapa Maori health organizations throughout the
North Taku and the four in the far north has a a,
a cancer society team embedded within it.
So we are really making a huge effort to get
to the communities where the need is strongest.
We have a Pacifica nurse now working out in South Auckland.
That's the first time we've, we've got that who, um,
it's going and she's able obviously
to connect much more easily with the community there.
Um, we also have an Indian nurse who's working with the, um,
Asian community and a Chinese nurse.
So we are really trying hard to be there for all
of Auckland and Northland.
But to find that extra funding outside of these grants
that I'm able to achieve, it does feel pretty daunting.
Thank you. I just had one.
The other thing was, I, I suppose it shouldn't be surprising
to see that cancer is our number one biggest killer,
but do you, what's the statistics on that? What's, how many
People? Well, one in three
New Zealanders will be diagnosed
with cancer in their lifetime.
Now, in terms of the biggest color,
I mean some people say it's cardiovascular,
but actually the statistic
that I've been told is actually cancer.
So, um, it could be a little bit around how you frame up,
you know, um, different ways that people actually,
'cause some people could have cancer and then die
of a heart attack, you know, so, um,
but cancer is certainly a leading killer in
New Zealand. Okay. Yeah.
Thank you so much. Thanks.
If I've got time to quickly make a suggestion.
Yeah, I think we've got one minute. Yeah. Okay. One
Minute. Um, 'cause I thought
people might go, oh,
this is just gonna be too hard.
How will we facilitate this money from online organizations?
I wondered about using the lottery board
and that could be a grant.
Another of the grants that they,
'cause they've got the people, they've got the facilities,
they've got the processes.
It would fit nicely under, you know, that type of,
um, lottery funding.
So it was just a thought I had
as I was walking along the other day.
Yeah, absolutely. Um, thank you so much
for your time and for the work that you do.
It's incredible. Thank you for being here today.
Well, it was a pleasure and a privilege, so thank you guys.
Thank you so much.
Thank you. Our next, uh, submitter is Tennis New Zealand.
Welcome.
So we've got, uh, Julie and Gareth Brett. Yeah. Well great.
Thank you. Thank you. We've got, um,
10 minutes for your submission.
We've got a copy of your Russian submission as well. Okay.
Lovely. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you for all your time.
Thank you all for your time today.
My name is Julie Patterson.
I'm the Chief executive of Tennis New Zealand.
And with me here today is our head of commercial
and marketing, Gareth Archer.
You've already heard from a range of sports
and community organizations about the vital importance
that Class four gaming funds play within our sector.
Quite simply. Without these funds, sport
and New Zealand could not function as it does today.
The evidence is clear that the introduction
of regulated online casino gambling will have a material
impact on gambling at physical premises such
as class four licensed venues.
The European Gaming
and Beating Association reported earlier this year
that online gambling is projected to grow from 39%
of Europe's Europe's total gambling revenue in 24
to 45% by 29.
While land-based gambling share will decline from 61%
to 55%,
reflecting a clear digital transformation across the
u, EU and uk.
The American Gaming Association reported in 24
that in the US online casino revenue grew by 30.3%
in Q3, while retail casino declined
by 0.9% highlighting a consumer shift towards digital
platforms, even in traditionally land-based markets.
As digitization trends continue across all
facets of our society.
Once online casino gambling is regulated
and licensed operators are allowed to openly advertise
where people choose to gamble in
New Zealand will change as well.
If class four funding reduces at the rate demonstrated in
the N-Z-I-E-R research
and no new funding sources were made available, the cost
to participate in sport would increase rapidly impacting the
health and wellbeing of over 1.6 million members of clubs.
Sport will become something that only those
with the financial resources will be able to access
and services and support offered by community clubs,
often run by volunteers, would decrease.
More strain would be placed on the multiple volunteers
and sporting clubs who are vital hubs within their
communities and they may cease to exist.
We do agree with the proposal
to regulate online casino gambling,
however we call back to what is a call the core tenement
of the Gambling Act 2003,
that gambling should benefit the community.
If that is not considered within the online casino gambling
bill, then the very fabric of our community sport
and so many other worthy causes is under threat.
Tennis New Zealand undertook research in 2020
regarding class four returns
to tennis at all levels of our system.
From clubs, community venues, to regional tennis bodies,
through to tennis New Zealand as the regional,
as the National Sporting Organization.
In 12 months, over 3.5 million
of class four funding was received
to support the delivery of tennis.
The vast majority of this was received at grassroots club
level where the funds being generated were
kept in the local area.
It should be noted that out of the 3.5 million,
less than 1% was received by Tennis New Zealand.
This provides further evidence that the most critical part
of our sporting system, grassroots community clubs
and venues are the most under threat at this bill is
passed in its current form.
Our plea echoes that of the many sport
and community organizations that you have heard already
put simply if the bill cut passed in its current form,
we are threatening the existence of
what is often a community hub
and gathering place for New Zealanders.
The only one is we'll be gambling operators most likely
based offshore, while the losers will be based
in every corner of New Zealand.
I noted in a recent media article
that Minister Van den thought it was slightly icky
to be bickering over the proceeds
of gambling income and where it goes.
I think it is significantly more concerning
to be considering the proposition
of 15 online casino licenses
where all profits will be retained by the owners
of those licenses.
But ignoring Exem existing principle
of New Zealand's gambling framework that a portion
of gambling profits must support the community.
We believe that there are simple
and effective solutions to ensure a percentage
of funds from the um, online casino gambling are retained
for the good of the community.
This can be done without significant impact on the value
of online casino gambling licenses,
and we do not believe it will dissuade gambling operators
from applying for these licenses as evidence.
We point to the Racing Industry Act 2020
and specifically Section one one oh which compels offshore
beating operators to pay business information, user charges
to the relevant New Zealand sporting organizations
for New Zealand based sporting content.
They offer wagering on new, uh, tennis.
New Zealand currently holds agreements
with 12 offshore beating operators, each
of whom pay a fee in return
for offering odds on New Zealand based tennis events.
This has become an important source of income
for our organization and crucially as a flow
of offshore income.
To support our sport here in New Zealand,
we have highlighted two proposed solutions for funding
distribution in our written submission to the committee.
Um, these options are as follow a percentage
of revenue from all online casino license entities is
provided for community use.
An agreed mechanism centralized or
otherwise could be established
to manage distribution of these funds.
Existing well-run class four entities can provide solid
examples of how this might work.
A further option is that a minimum of five
of the 15 licenses or 33% are
provided to New Zealand based entities,
which have trust deeds
or similar doc, similar documentation
that ensures proceeds are
provided for community use in New Zealand.
It is our opinion that existing class four entities are best
placed to deliver these services
as they have the necessary mechanisms already in place
and community organizations understand the
process to apply for funds.
My colleague Gareth, will now highlight an important point
we wish to raise regarding the intersection
of the Racing Industry Act
and the online casino gambling bill.
Thank you Julie. Good afternoon everyone.
Um, as Julie mentioned, tennis New Zealand
and many other national sporting organizations are receiving
important sources of,
of income from offshore betting operators
who take bets on New Zealand Sport via the Racing Act
and particularly the business information use
charges covered under this.
This piece of legislation serves us well,
bringing in valuable offshore funds
to support New Zealand sport.
It's fair and reasonable that if offshore operators profit
from sporting deliver often at significant costs,
that a portion of these funds should come back
to New Zealand sporting organizations
to help meet the costs associated with the event delivery
and other crucial services.
Our ask in relation to the OCG bill is a relatively simple
and pragmatic one that the list
of relevantly legislation contained in section five
of the bill be updated
to include the Racing Industry Act 2020 an act which is
clearly and obviously relevant to online casino gambling,
both involve regulation of online gambling in New Zealand
under six section 14 of the OCG bill.
An entity which puts forward an expression of interest
for an online casino gambling license will be required
to declare any breaches
or investigations into breaches of relevant legislation.
Put simply the Racing Act should be considered relevant in
assessing expressions of interest
for online casino gambling licenses.
The cause and effect of the simple change is an assurance
that the flow of significant offshore funds used
to support New Zealand sporting entities
and delivering these sporting events
will remain in place in regards to any offshore entities
who wish to take bets on New Zealand Sport
and also to operate online casino gambling in New Zealand,
of which we understand there will be cases
of organizations that wish to do both.
Um, lastly, we'd like to just note
that whilst this change will be material for a select group
of national sporting organizations such
as Tennis New Zealand, whose sporting events are bid on
internationally, it will not go near replacing the amount
that may be lost to the many thousands
of sports and community groups.
If the principal that gambling should benefit the community
is not applied within the OCG bill In that respect
for clarity, this request is made in addition
to those points Julie made earlier
and doesn't serve as any sort of replacement. Thank you.
Thank you. Thanks so much for your submission.
Um, I do have a question about your 15, uh,
licenses proposal,
but just also to acknowledge my husband in,
in recent times has done a bit of work with tennis Auckland.
Oh, I understand.
Is one of your members of your They are national body.
So the, the question that I had really was the proposal
to have, uh, so the proposal at the moment is 15 licenses
and you are proposing that five of those go to existing, um,
or clarify if this is incorrect, existing, um,
class four providers.
So essentially that if, if we were to, um, implement, well,
if the government was good to implement the suggestion,
it would mean that essentially there'd be 10, um, possibly
for profit, uh, entities that may be able
to ob obtain licenses.
And then five would be kind of another, uh, way
that the existing Class four providers could provide,
say an online gambling service.
Is that, is that correct? That
That is correct. So,
uh, it, it is an option.
Um, I think our preferred option, to be honest,
and we would looking, trying to be solution focused, um,
but our preferred option would be that the, the, um, all,
all operators would return a percentage of their profits,
um, to the community as,
as I think probably it would be a little more complex
to try and have a mixed model.
Um, but, uh, certainly
that all operators would have a return,
um, to the community.
Yeah. Okay. Yeah, see that's, that's your first one
and then the second one, so it'll be in addition to that.
Yes. That's great. That makes sense.
Uh, colleagues questions? No. Okay.
Thank you so much for coming in and thanks.
Thank you For your time. Thank you.
My next is grassroots trust limited.
I was hoping there was gonna be a
big clock or something here, so
I ah, check my comment, but I'm sure you'll tell me
If I'm running Over. Yeah,
I I don't worry about that.
I will, I think we're running a couple of minutes early.
Oh, um, two minutes early, so yeah, we're 2 2 28 now. Okay.
2 38. Um, I'll let you know,
but um, we've got two submissions from you I think, um, uh,
initial and supplementary submissions.
So we've received both of those and uh, can take those
as read and over to you.
Alright, thank you very much.
My name is Aaron Lawton, I'm the CEO of Grassroots Trust
and seated beside me is Martin Bradley, our chairman.
Um, and together we represent the largest operator
of class four gaming machines in the north island.
So we know this committee and we've sat here
for the last hour, has received a flood
of submission setting out in detail the risks
and the bleak outlook for thousands
of New Zealanders if the bill passes in its current form.
And we do share many of those concerns.
But today, rather than repeating the problems,
we wanna focus on solutions.
I'll just move this over here.
We support regulation of online casinos.
I wanna be clear on that it's the right thing to do,
but it must be done in a way that protects the communities
who rely on gambling returns.
So we already know that online casinos are here.
Uh, independent analysis estimates, the current spend is
around 795 million a year and growing
and pretending it will go away as akin
to putting our head in the sand.
The choice is not whether this industry
exists, it already does.
The choice is who benefits from it.
So our message is pretty simple.
If we can't beat them, join them,
but we need to do it in a way
that protects community funding.
This afternoon I'm gonna highlight four key points
and I'm gonna address them one by one.
Number one, and I think we just heard
before from tennis, is the need to ring fence licenses
for class four societies.
I'm gonna talk to that. The second is a business model
reality check around online casinos.
The third is harm minimization, which is critical
to the bill and any format that it ends up looking like.
And the fourth is not forgetting about venue operators
who actually help raise the money
that goes to our communities.
First and foremost, if we look at ring fencing licenses
for Class four societies, we know that the bill is proposing
to issue 15 online casino licenses via auction.
Now, if you go back and look at the
publicly available documents, that cap appears
to align roughly with the number
of offshore entities currently remitting most
of the relevant GST and duties today.
In other words, it's been calibrated
to today's offshore market composition rather than
to New Zealand's long-term community interest.
Our ask here is straightforward.
The government should reserve a portion
of those online licenses
or add additional ones for Class four societies issued
outside of the auction process and at no charge.
As you know, the current rules restrict us
as a Class four society from investing
directly in any online venture.
A reserved license would allow us to align
with a commercial operator under full regulatory
oversight as partners.
We'd bring credible business plans
and robust harm minimization strategies just
as we do in the land-based system.
But here is the crucial difference.
Our share of commercial returns would be recycled back into
Kiwi communities not siphoned offshore.
Now that preserves the public good principle at the core
of New Zealand's gambling framework
that you've heard over many days.
And it also provides a defensive hedge against declining
land-based revenues as play migrates online.
Now, without the safeguard, we face a future
where Kiwis gamble billions and it will be billions.
If we are to believe the stats in time,
while no community distributions are required from those
licensees, by providing worthy Class four societies
with an online license at no cost, we will be able
to offset the likely loss of land-based revenues
and distribute our share
of those profits straight back to the community.
Many of these groups that have come in
and spoken today, I think what's also really important,
it's at no cost to the government.
It's a case of you either ringfence the licenses
or create some more
because 15 is somewhat of an arbitrary number.
Point two, a business model reality check.
And I think this is really important.
We've heard calls even in this room in the last hour,
to require online casinos to return a percentage
of their revenues to the community.
Some would say 40%, which mirrors the Class four rule.
We respect the intent of that,
but with all due respect, I believe that's the comparison
of apples to oranges.
As you know, legislated class four returns are set at 40%
of gross gaming machine profits.
Essentially for every dollar of revenue generated
by grassroots trust,
40 cents is distributed in the form of grants.
Online casinos run a very different model
and newly regulated markets operators typically incur very
high customer acquisition
and retention costs, often a large share of gross revenue
and many operate at losses in the early years as they seek
to acquire customers.
A flat 40% of revenue in that context is unrealistic
and risks pushing back play to the black market,
which undermines the bills, uh, channelization goal.
I think if all you need to do is look at some
of these global players, we keep talking about
these faceless entities.
Go and look at their readily available financials
that are online and you'd be hard pressed to find a margin,
a profit margin above 20%.
So when we're sitting here talking about the, the need
to give some of those profits back,
it's a pretty small piece of the pie compared
to the land-based model.
Um, so for us, we see a solution as not a blunt percentage
that won't hold in digital economics.
The solution is to embed trusted custodians.
So class four societies into the online market via
reserved licenses.
So the community share of online proceeds is protected
and practiced, not just in principle.
The third point I wanted to talk to is harm minimization.
As we said before, it's one
of the three core objectives in this bill
and we absolutely support that.
But the policy must reflect
how harm is actually reduced in the real market.
I've actually just returned from one of the largest
global online gaming conferences
and I have to say the scale there was staggering.
We're talking about acres of exhibitors
and billions of dollars on show all from entities Hungrily
eyeing up the soon to be regulated New Zealand market,
people out there are talking about it.
What, however, was most conspicuous in its absence is I did
not see a single booth focused on harm minimization
or have a single conversation
where anyone brought up this critical component.
So I think that needs to tell you
where the global priorities are,
which are very much focused on profit.
By contrast, our Class four
bakes in license level accountability.
If we fail to manage harm, we put our license at risk.
We operate exclusion registers, strict integrity standards
and constant DIA oversight.
And we are asking you
to extend those protections across the online market.
I think one of the most important things that I'd employ you
to consider is the government must make it
absolutely mandatory that any regulated online casino
operating in New Zealand must feed into the land-based
database of excluded players.
We understand that the technology is relatively easy to do,
but we have heard sort
of anecdotally it may not be something that is required.
Now, no one wins
of someone who's an excluded player from one of our venues
or another trust venue goes along, goes online
and loses more than they should.
Uh, so we're asking that that is
absolutely critical from a harm perspective that though
that online exclusion is the same
as the land-based exclusion.
And finally 0.4 I want to talk about very briefly is
that we can't actually forget about our
venue operators and all of this.
These are not big corporates, they're small business owners.
They're often family run, often migrants who've chosen
to build a life here and who play a
critical role in their communities.
They host the gaming machines and pubs, clubs
and hotels across the country.
They employ thousands of New Zealanders.
They pay company tax
and they provide the social hubs
that hold many communities together.
As gambling spend shifts online,
their revenue is going to fall.
And with hospitality already under intense pressure,
many will be pushed to the brink.
I wanna make it real for you very briefly in Pu
and re, there are no St.
John ambulances funded
by Grassroots Trust without the contributions
of EE Tarn Deep
and Southern Deep Buttressing or Harry and Dr.
Singh venue operators
who run their local pubs in those regions
and help generate funds
to be distributed back into their communities.
Without them, we won't be able to fund those communities.
It cannot be right
that this bill in its current format helps offshore gambling
corporations headquartered in Malta
or Gibraltar at the direct expense
of small kiwi business owners
who are deeply invested in their local communities.
See Martin's looking at his watch,
so I'll be very quick and finish.
There's a couple of things I want you
to consider as part of that.
For our venue operators,
they must either be given an opportunity
to participate in some way, whether it's
by potentially being affiliates
or more importantly, we need to look
and review the current compensation model
as it's enshrined in the gambling act.
Because the flowing consequences
of making this bill into law is that they are likely
to lose a significant amount of their revenue
and they play a critical part in the ecosystem.
Look, this is a once in a generation reform the decision
before you is simple but profound.
Do we allow offshore operators
to dominate extracting profits while no community
distributes distributions are required?
Or do we empower trusted New Zealand Class four societies
to act as kaki,
where participating in the online gambling space will allow
us to continue to fund coaches, uniforms, ambulances,
and local services in the communities
where the money is raised.
We support regulation,
but it must be regulation
that protects communities, not strips them.
Give us the tools and we will continue
to deliver tangible benefits to the people.
Of Thank you very much for your time
and we're happy to answer questions if I haven't run over.
Thank you. We are now at time,
but we do have two questions from committee members.
So we are a couple of minutes early.
So with um, their agreement, um, Melissa,
you can do the first question.
Uh, thank you very much. I really like your analogy.
We apples and oranges, uh,
with different things that they actually face.
Um, I'd like to know, you actually talked about how c four
operators could potentially, uh, be reserved.
Um, five out of the 15 licenses.
I think anyone can actually apply
or bid for the license, not just have it reserved.
So you are able to compete,
but how do you actually see this working?
Because you say that so
that you could return the profits back to the community,
but if you were one of the online license holder,
there will be no requirement at this stage for you
to return anything to the community.
So, so it's interesting around, yes, class four is able
to participate, but it's an auction.
And by nature that means we have to pay money for a license.
We are not allowed to invest our funds
into a purchase of a license.
So that's why I'm saying you should allow
us to have one for free.
Um, the second part of it is if grassroots trust, uh,
was a shareholder in a combined
or a joint venture by nature of their trust deed, any,
any revenues would be treated as money
to be distributed to the community.
So what we're saying is commercial returns,
if grassroots own 30% of an online casino, that money
that they would get would then be required by their trustee
to be passed on to the committee.
So 40% of what you earn from
that online gambling money? Well
You could, you, could you look, I would say that
what we are actually talking about here is we would expect
all of it to be distributed,
but that would require potentially change, right?
Grassroots is not looking to stockpile money.
We just wanna protect the fact
that we're gonna have a downside here
and we be, we see the ramifications of
what we do in communities.
So we want to share and it's a defensive edge.
Right. Quick final question on Mark, just
Really quickly on your four main points,
I'm really interested in harm minimization
in the self-exclusion.
There's only some submitters
and your view submitted mention stuff exclusion.
And you're saying that the model is land-based? Yes.
So how easy will that be in systematic?
So it's actually the technology's not that difficult.
There is a land-based database at the moment.
So when someone is excluded in any way venue,
it goes into a land-based database that everyone has
and the facial rec cameras come up online.
You would have the ability to take photos.
And essentially what we're saying is it needs to be talking,
it needs to be a condition
of any online license, regardless of if it's us.
The worst thing out of all of this is
of someone who's excluded 'cause they have harm
and problems from gambling can go online.
We must have some way, shape,
or form check around that. Okay.
Thank you. Um, obviously, uh, great, um, to have you here
and some really engaging questions.
So thank you so much for being here.
Apologies we've run outta time now. Thank you. Thank you.
Thanks very much. Our next, uh, submitter will be, uh,
feed families, not pokies.
Uh, we are just running a tiny bit early.
So thank you, um, for, um, stepping in to
do your submission a little bit early today.
No problem. I really appreciate it.
We've got a copy of your Russian submission
and we've got em set aside, uh, to hear from you today.
So over to you.
Kira Koto, uh, uh, David Hay England.
Pardon me? I'm the chairperson of Feed Families, not pokies.
This is my deputy chairperson, Colin Bridle.
Uh, I come from a background of having, uh,
worked on Auckland Council's Class four gambling policy for
several three years, about 10 years ago.
Uh, so I have some expertise in that side of things.
And Colin has been a, um, a, a social worker.
I work with Salvation Army, the social worker background
in with gambling harm.
Um, so there are three key points to our submission,
and you have the written submission in front of you.
Uh, this bill, if it goes through in its current form,
would invite the industry to put pokies in our pockets.
If you ask New Zealanders,
do they want this, they will say no.
And we support those parts of the bill that could be amended
or used to effectively ban online
casino gambling in New Zealand.
So putting pokies in your pocket.
Uh, if you go to the first page of our submission,
you'll see the Ministry of Health Statistics showing the
proportion of people who are treated for
gambling harm each year over a series of years.
And by far the most of those are class four gamblers.
At the very top you'll see the category other,
this little gray bar.
Uh, there isn't a separate category
for online gambling at the moment in terms of
gambling harm treatment, but I suspect that
that's growing trend is what we're seeing there.
So there's no doubt that this kind of gambling,
uh, is the most harmful.
And in the submission we talk about how essentially, uh,
pokey gambling is a brain hack, that it feeds the, uh,
reward system in the brain with little hits of dopamine.
And that this is, would be familiar to anybody
that's spent too much time on TikTok Facebook, you know, uh,
the device in your pocket does this to you
and putting online gambling onto your phone in your pocket,
uh, would use the same technology
and have the same effects
of creating this compulsive repetitive behavior
that you see at a pokey venue.
The second page,
there's a graph showing the decline in the number of pokies,
uh, over 20 odd years since the, uh,
the gambling act was introduced in 2003.
And that decline is entirely
because communities around New Zealand, we, if you ask,
do you want more pokies or less, they say,
we don't want them, we want a sinking lead policy.
We want fewer pokey machines.
And if you were to ask New Zealanders,
do they want online casino gambling?
Do they want the pokies in their pocket?
I dare say you'll get exactly the same response.
The answer will be no, we don't.
Uh, the third graph is it's there just to sort
of show what the money is and where it goes.
So there are three bars there,
and the first one is TAB gambling.
The second one is lotto,
and the third one is Class four pokies,
not including those in casinos.
And you can see that, say a lotto about 85%
of New Zealanders in any given year will gamble,
uh, by a lot ticket.
About 15% do that one, uh, once a week
or more often for class four venues,
it's about 15% will gamble on a Pokemon machine in a year.
And about 1.5% will do it more, uh, weekly, more often.
However, that's nearly a billion dollars a year.
It's more than almost TAB
and lotto combined in terms of the gambler's losses.
But the more interesting bar is the turnover.
So that's a $10 billion a year.
And that's because people will replay their winnings again
and again and again as they sit at the machine.
So it counts every, every bit.
And, uh, there's, it provides lots of little rewards, lots
of little prizes as you go along.
So this drives the compulsive behavior and the addiction.
And this is exactly what the, uh,
what the pokies in your pocket would do.
So they don't literally spend $10 billion a year.
They might spend maybe a billion, half, a billion
and a half, but they're playing
it again and again and again.
It just counts up to, to 10.
So this is a kind of a graphic demonstration of the effect
that the technology has.
So the basis of our submission is
that this is a very bad idea
to license online casino gambling in New Zealand.
Um, there is enough substance in the bill
to regulate unlicensed gamblers, uh, online casino gambling,
and you could use that substance to ban it altogether.
So the take down notices, the prohibition,
uh, and so on and so forth.
And we think those parts
of the bill have a great deal of merit.
They could be improved, they could be strengthened,
but you've got the, the bones of a very useful, uh,
probe online casino gambling prohibition act in that bill.
So, um, I will hand over to Colin.
And I guess the, the question, you know, who wants this?
If New Zealanders don't it, it's in our mind.
It is, um, people who would benefit from creating misery
in, in gamblers, and Colin can speak to that.
This is what the legislation about me,
the act defines problem gambler
as a person whose gambling causes harm
or may cause harmful gambling is now more widely used too.
It moves the onus onto the system rather than the
individual responsibility.
But this is what the access harm is defined as an act
of harm or distress of any kind, caused
or exacerbated by a person's gambling
and includes personal, social
and economic harm suffered by any person.
Damage to relationships including neglected dependence,
emotional and psychological distress disruptions to work
and study, financial distress, loss of income,
potentially fraud
and other related crimes and family violence.
I come from where there was family violence.
I've worked with people over 11 years with the
Salvation Army as a social worker
and a community ministries manager.
I've had people die because of their gambling habit
and they've committed suicide.
I've had a young lady, lady who drove her vehicle
with her young child into a transformer,
an electrical transformer trying to kill herself
because she thought she was being chased by somebody
for the money from her gambling debts.
I've seen kids go hungry.
All the normal things that happened with that
and in Tokra we're flooded with them.
They're a blight on the high deprivation communities,
the concentrations.
And if you look at the work, where are they?
They're in the areas of poorest communities.
Why are they there? They're there to strip people
of their wealth and their identity and their wellbeing.
What really annoys me is that I'm looking,
I'm actually looking for a champion at this
table, at the pro me.
Where is somebody that will champion the cause of the poor
and protect the we?
Where is that in the, um, act in 3 1 4?
The gambling act?
It starts, I I have this solution is
the minute it says the Governor General may
by ordering council, make on recommendation of the minister,
make regulations for all part of the following purposes.
A prescribe the maximum number of gaming machines
that may be operated in New Zealand
or any area within New Zealand.
For me, the how is I'm a simple person.
The obvious answer here to help the poorest
of our communities would be for the minister
to do something like the following.
The number of poking machines should be set at zero
in high deprivation communities.
And what I mean by high deprivation communities, those
with deprivation eight, nine, and 10.
And if you did that, you'd remove 70%
of the class four sector from our country.
It's the poorest part.
The point we're making here is that
both is in our pockets.
You don't have that control.
You can't target the, the harm minimization
particular communities or roots.
It's what's going widespread.
It's going everywhere it's gonna go.
Now, do you have any questions? Um,
I have a, uh oh, no, you go. No,
No.
Um, thank you for your powerful submission.
Um, I think it's, uh, a message we haven't heard
strongly enough, um, throughout this process, the harm
that gambling causes, I suppose, um, uh,
people who wouldn't agree with that would say that, um,
gambling is an inevitability of society.
And so to play devil's advocate
and put that question to you,
how, how do you respond to that?
How do you respond to the people who would say, even if we,
um, even if we don't agree with gambling
and we try and, um, prevent it from occurring,
that it will still exist. And it's genuine question.
Yeah. Works on the whole path.
Says, I'm not a to, I go out and buy a lotto ticket.
I don't get lot bosses, but they're not against all forms
of gambling situations.
It's just this particularly dalicious form of gambling
that hacks the brain of a normal person.
It does affect Asian minor certain communities
more than other communities.
But that's because where the medias are located.
But any normal human being is susceptible
'cause it's just the way might functions. But
The machine For the far, and,
and it's from this type of gambling
that we're talking about, very frequent, repetitive, um,
engagement with the, the device.
The machinery is actually designed
to give you a dopamine hit in the brain
every time you play it,
and the more you become addicted to the machine.
And so what are they doing now?
The building machines with greater capacity
to, because it all operates on the UBA system
and the dopamine hat,
and so each generation of machine has become
more upskilled than the last generation of machines.
That's funny. And so
AI and machine learning, um, sitting behind a bed
and then being able to detect your particular pattern
of bail, what makes you pay and to send that to you.
So that's the type of gambling thing.
Thank you for that answer. Melissa has a question.
I I'm sure we could ask you a lot of questions.
I'll just give Melissa list of the last question here,
but thank you very much for
Your, yeah. So specifically
against pokies. Yeah.
The, So online gambling can actually have different
licenses and they're not all pokies,
but they're also other forms of gambling.
Yeah, but it's the repetitive quick Yes. Response wheel.
Spinning the wheel, the consecutive
that gets you into the trans like state.
So that's what you are. And,
and then it becomes a virtual. So
There's a very good book fiction by GA
service, um, losses, win losses disguised as wins.
Um, you know, the, the fact that moment press the button,
it's actually decided if you win or loss. Yeah. One or
So that wasn't the question.
What I was getting, sorry, very quickly,
but so gambling
online already exists.
There are many, uh, already as somebody said, there's uh,
uh, approximately around 15, uh, who are currently geo
who actually pays GST currently? I don't know. I have
Geo They can geo, yeah, Right.
So geo block,
I have submitters have actually said it was
very difficult to do.
And even, uh, today somebody,
their 14-year-old child could actually buy geoblock.
How do you suggest that we already have this issue?
People are already gambling online, like market.
We as in the, the bill is trying to regulate so
that it actually comes out from the dark into the light.
So we can actually regulate
how do you actually think we need to do it better?
So it comes down to part that talks about take down orders
or unlicensed online gambling.
Mm-hmm. Now you apply that idea of take down to all online
gambling, but I, a lot of people online gambling,
TP books, but getting online,
I don't think it's problematic,
but it's not the instant response.
But, you know, uh, so it's, it's not as, um,
so there are questions about how do you get
around virtual private networks when you
issue and take down order.
Who do you ship to as service provider?
Is the, the, um, you know,
website is located overseas?
Is it something like cloud?
There's a lot of technology
and technical technological workarounds that could be used.
Um, and regulating internet is physical complex.
You want this, it's something you have to deal with.
I'm not, not confident, adequate,
but I think it, it could be strengthened,
especially even if you get route of licensing some,
how are you going to block the UN license clause?
How do you do that? You've gotta solve that properly.
Mm. Thank you. Uh, apologies
for running out of time, but, um, that's all right.
Thank, genuinely thank you for, um, being here,
but also for the work that you do,
which is, which is so important.
So thank you very much. Most welcome. Thank you. Thank you.
Our next submitter is volleyball New Zealand.
Leah Hamilton, welcome. Welcome. Thank you.
We've got, um, 10 minutes set aside for your submission
and you are welcome to use that time
or, um, we'll make you go over time with questions
as we have with the other people, but, um, over to you.
No problem. Sorry, I've got a bit of a croaky voice,
but we'll, we'll push through.
Feel free to have some water there.
Preload. Yes.
Thank you. And thanks for the opportunity to appear
before you today, uh, called Claire Hamilton Ungawa.
Uh, I'm a board member of Volleyball New Zealand
and serve as interim chair
of the Finance Risk and Audit Committee.
I'm also the CEO of Auckland Basketball Services Limited,
a regional sports organization based in tak.
Both entities have made written
and requested, um, verbal submissions.
This is a verbal submission on
behalf of volleyball New Zealand.
Unfortunately, a BS was not
provided the opportunity for a verbal submission,
but the view is aligned.
So, um, I'm here today on behalf of sport
that is not only growing rapidly across our Tiera,
but is also deeply embedded in our communities, especially
among Ranga Tahi
and across a broad demographic,
including within our low socioeconomic communities.
We support the overarching goal of the online casino
gambling bill to bring oversight
to offshore gambling platforms
that introduce regulatory clarity.
However, we're seriously concerned
that the bill in its current form overlooks a cornerstone
of New Zealand's gambling policy
that gambling flow seeds must return to the community.
What we do oppose is the lack of any mechanism to ensure
that a sheer of online gambling revenue
is reinvested into the community's most vulnerable
to gambling related harm.
Volleyball. New Zealand has 15 regional associations across
our, with approximately 120 volleyball clubs delivering
volleyball programs to over 50,000 people across grass,
sand, and indoor courts.
We have over 27,000 participants in secondary school
sport alone each year.
Grants funding is an essential element
of our delivery each year across each education community
and pathways programs.
With the additional flow on effect
that whilst utilizing Class four funding
to support delivery, this money cycles straight back into
our local and regional economies through employment
and purchase of goods and services.
This would also be impacted by the proposed bill.
Whilst we acknowledge the importance of diversified revenue
to support delivery, the reality for most sports
and community organizations is
that Class four funding is necessary
to provide the existing levels of sporting opportunities.
At the grassroots level, sponsorship remains difficult
to secure, its sustainable levels
to mana funding is reducing
and local government support is stretched across
many community needs.
With the focus being on core services.
Whilst we're committed to diverse income streams, the pace
of revenue development cannot match the immediate shortfall
that would result from reduced class four funding.
Without a dedicated community funding mechanism in this
bill, the support
that underpins grassroots sport is at serious risk.
The consequences are not abstract,
they're immediate, and they're measurable.
When funding disappears, the cost
of participating in organized sport rises.
That means fewer young people can afford to play,
particularly in communities already
facing economic hardship.
As participation drops, we lose more than just numbers.
We lose connection, inclusion,
and the positive social outcomes that sport delivers.
The ripple effect is felt in schools and whanau
and across communities.
Reduced access to sport leads to increased isolation,
diminished wellbeing, and fewer
opportunities for youth development.
This is not just a financial issue, it's a social one.
And the cost of inaction will be born
by the very communities that this bill should be protecting.
While the Ministry of Internal Affairs has suggested
that Class four funding will remain unaffected,
the data paints a very different picture.
With the inevitable societal shift to living, interacting,
and transacting online,
there will be unintended consequences from that.
This which can't be ignored.
If this bill moves forward, unchanged, we stand to lose
far more than just the game on a court.
For some, they will lose the safe spaces
where young people connect, grow, and thrive.
The social cost will be felt in every community.
The Community Sport collective led
by Martin Sneden has submitted an impact evidence report
that draws on both domestic data
and international comparisons
that we would like to reiterate.
It clearly shows that online gambling is already displacing
revenue from land-based gambling sources,
and this trend is accelerating.
Some key insights include
after adjusting for inflation, class four, funding
to sport declined by 14% between 2018 and 2023.
A real loss of 153 million.
The Department of Internal Affairs own figures show a 23%
drop in inflation adjusted gambling machine profits from
June 21 to March 25.
The New Zealand Institute of Economic Research estimates
that regulating online gambling could reduce annual class
four grants to sport by up
to 43 million in total community grants by as much
as 80 million per year.
We're already seeing a shift in consumer behavior.
TAB New Zealand reports that 85%
of betting now happens online.
Lotto. New Zealand's digital sales have grown by from 10%
to 46% over the past decade.
This is not a hypothetical risk, it's a clear
and present shift in the gambling landscape.
As it stands, the bill would allow licensed online casino
operators to generate significant profits from New
Zealanders without any obligation to contribute
to the communities impacted by gambling harm.
That is fundamentally odds with the intent
of the gambling Act.
2003. We are calling on the committee to strengthen the bill
by one, reaffirming the principle
that gambling must deliver Community benefit.
Two, introducing a compulsory community funding levy on
licensed online casino operators.
No less than New Zealand base operators are required
to comply with three, allocating a dedicated portion of
that levy to community, sport and recreation.
A highly valued and essential aspect
of the current Class four framework.
Four, establishing a fair, transparent
and accountable system for distributing those funds.
Five, ensuring that the rules relating to advertising rights
and restrictions on casino gambling,
online casino gambling license operators along
with the rules relating to the rights
and restrictions of Class four trusts to advertise.
And six, that the OCG bill has a greater focus on prevention
of unregulated online casino gambling activity
to ensure the proceeds it earns
and distributes to community sport are maximized.
It isn't just sport, it's a powerful tool for connection,
wellbeing, and personal growth for our community.
These spaces foster, belonging, resilience, and opportunity.
That's why it's critical that we protect and sustain them.
We urge you to use this opportunity to safeguard the future
of community sport.
Let's ensure that the profits from online gambling don't
disappear offshore or into private hands,
but are reinvested where they're needed most
back into our communities.
Thanks for your time and consideration.
Thank you so much. Thank you.
Um, we do have a few minutes left for questions.
I just had a, um, not super related question,
but is volleyball, um,
growing in New Zealand? Yes. Yes. Yeah,
So this year it's, uh,
and well, the last last school year it's
jumped up another level.
So think it's the second highest, um, ary school sport.
Wow. Yeah.
My daughter's just started to get into it,
so I was wondering about that.
Seems certainly Grand South Auckland Yeah. Teams. Yeah.
Yeah, it is. And because you have the sand grass
and what sort of platforms to play on it,
it's incredibly flexible and adaptable.
Yeah. Amazing. Other questions, colleagues? No.
Well thank you so much for you coming in today.
Thanks for the work you do
and best of luck with the,
the growing popularity of the volleyball.
Thank you. And I was also gonna say just with the, um,
other organization that didn't get a, uh, opportunity
to do an oral submission, we did have,
and I'll just check with Jonathan, the number of submissions
that we did get Round roundabout.
Yeah. Some we weren't able to hear from everyone.
You've be here till Christmas. Yeah.
But appreciate, um, uh,
your representation of the views as well. Great.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Our next submitter is Touch New Zealand.
Welcome, Joe.
Thank You. We've got a copy of your written submission,
uh, which we've had a chance to look at.
And, uh, we've got 10 minutes set aside for your,
uh, oral submission today.
And thank you for joining us a little bit,
little bit early as well.
So I'll check that. Thank you over to you.
Um, I could almost just reiterate what the lady
before me just said, and I'm sure you are hearing this like
over and over again, so I'm not gonna bore you
with the same thing over and over again.
So, uh, look, I represent Touch New Zealand.
I'm the Chief Executive of Touch New Zealand,
the National Sports Organization, pulm,
which is a social capital organization, which is a, um,
a hundred percent owned by touch NZ,
but works in deprived in, um, underrepresented communities
and quality Events Limited, which is another subsidiary
of Touch NZ, which does, uh,
basically runs major tournaments, events,
projects, et cetera.
So other very wide representation across
both sport and social.
Um, impact, um, in terms of who I represent.
So I guess I'm speaking from that perspective.
Um, I mean, a huge amount of money is, um,
distributed every year, um, into sport
through Class four gaming.
It's about 366 million I think at the 2024.
Last check-in about 186 million went to sport.
So it is a lot of money involved in this.
Um, my membership of some hundred
and 50,000, which puts us in the same bracket as rugby,
netball, football, basketball.
Now we're one of the biggest sports in the country,
but we're slightly different to all these other sports in
that they're all high performance sports.
They get money through the, uh, sponsorships
and, um, high performance outcomes such
as the All Blacks and so forth.
We don't, we're a community sport that happens
to have a high performance outcome.
So for us, this money in the community spaces is probably
more important than it is to some of them.
It's relatively critical for us that, that that exists.
Um, uh, sport has a significant social return on investment.
I think the last, uh, a couple
of studies have set it at about 2.12.
So for every dollar spent, you get $2.12
return on investment.
Again, that's a significant return, uh,
of social investment, um, you know, within our community.
So, um, I guess there's,
as has been referenced by I'm sure a number of people, um,
you know, there's a number of studies have been completed
around online gaming versus onsite gaming.
Um, you know, both in casinos and also the, with the TAB
and online gambling there.
So you, you've got all the stuff already.
You've, you know, you've read our submissions.
I'm not gonna sit here and read that again.
Um, I think we would contend
that the same thing will happen here.
You know, that if you are going to go down the path
of having something,
even though it's regulated, if it's not returning
to the community, it's gonna cannibalize the
class four portion that currently is
returning to the community.
Uh, and there are studies and,
and a, a number, a large amount of data much
as which has been presented to the minister already
through Martin said and et cetera,
that outlines all of those things.
So I I'm sure you've read all this.
Um, from our perspective, uh, we in favor of regulation.
Absolutely. Yes. We think it should be regulated.
Um, I think we all know that from time in Memorial,
people have gambled and they're always going to gamble.
It's just built into the DNA of human beings that, you know,
you do these types of things.
Um, so it's, it's underground versus
above the ground, right?
Uh, above the ground. You get taxation,
you get GST, you get a return.
It can be used in all sorts of other ways
that are useful to the community.
So, you know, in that respect, yeah, we're in favor of,
of regulating it.
Um, I think
where the bill is missing the mark is across the return
to community, which, you know, if there's a return
to community that kind of reinforces the, uh,
call it the social contract that, you know, between, um,
that, that sits across gambling in so much as that
if you're going to have something that's a negative
and you can't stop it anyway
and you regulate it, at least use some
of the proceeds towards the good that can be achieved.
Um, you know, with within the community, I would
of course contend that's in social outcomes in sport
'cause that's my job and that's where I sit.
Um, but there are other places
that can go as well, of course.
Um, in terms of what should it look like?
Well, um, I always sit in the space of equity and equality.
You know, if you're going to ask the Class four gaming
to return, 40% of the process
of the community should ask the online
gamers to do the same thing.
You know, it's just equal. It's just fair. It's fairness.
Now, I think there's a co there's a common sense element in
this you, that it just makes sense to do that.
So Yep. We're in favor of regulation. Yep.
We're in favor of the government getting tax and GST
and helping our communities.
We think it needs to be that there needs
to be a return to community.
We would favor the 40% that already exists in terms of the,
um, class four gaming.
Um, and I've been in this business, so
I, I served the country for 25 years as, as a,
as a soldier and then a police officer.
So I've got the service behind me.
I've spent the last 20 years in sport management
and albeit the class four gaming system is not perfect.
I haven't seen a better one yet for distribute,
for distributing the, uh, proceeds.
You know, and I think in terms of if you wanted to look into
that and is there another system
that's a conversation for another day, right?
That's not what this is about today.
But in, you know, in my experience that
that's the only system that I can see where, which is
far it from perfect, is connected to its communities.
You know, they do sit within the, the, um, agencies
that distribute the money,
the trust do sit within their communities, are connected
to their communities, um,
in a much stronger way than say the Laies
Commission would be, or some central.
So on that basis alone, I think is the best way to go.
Um, could there be another way? Yep. Possibly.
But that's a discussion for another day.
And you've got my contact details.
We wanna have that discussion one day,
more than happy to have it.
So, um, so really that's all I've got.
I mean, I, yeah, I'm not gonna take up my 10 minutes
necessarily, but I think it's just, um,
reinforces probably pretty much of what you've heard.
Happy to answer any questions. Of course.
Thank you. Um, no, I mean,
I think it's, uh, you're, you're right.
We have, um, had a consistent message from sporting
organizations that's actually really helpful when it comes
to putting forward our report
because, um, we,
we are not confused about where the position is.
So please don't apologize for, for repeating that
because, um, it actually, um,
makes our job easier when we can report back to the house on
what we heard and there is a consistent message from
those organizations.
I don't have a specific question, um,
colleagues. Oh, Melissa,
I do. Excellent.
Very similar question,
but I've actually given you, there have been some people
who actually talked about comparing, uh, C four, uh, class,
um, gambling versus, uh,
online casino would be like comparing apples and oranges.
Mm-hmm. Be like comparing rugby union
as an all black versus touch rugby.
Do you think they should pay the same 40%?
It's a different role together, be like,
wouldn't it be fantastic if touch rugby got the same money
that, um, um, the BL actually got?
Yes.
I think gambling is gambling at the end of the day,
you know, and you know, people are attracted
to different forms of gambling depending on what they're,
the way they want to view the
world or what they think of it.
Is it more harmful sitting in front of machine
with wheels spinning in a, on,
on an onsite venue versus sitting in front
of a online casino where the same thing is happening?
But on a screen that's a bit of a, probably a long bow to,
to draw, I would've thought.
Don't think the difference is that material.
I mean, I'm not an expert in the space, you know,
but I think, I don't think it's that material.
Um, you know, you, would it be great for touch football,
touch rugby, touch, whatever you wanna call it
to get the same money as rugby?
Well, that equity equality argument even exists in class
four now, you know, where if you look at the statistics of
who gets the most, you know, again,
but that's a different conversation and not one for today.
Again, one, I'm more than happy to have, if you ever want
to call me into your office, you've got my contact details.
But, um, yeah, I, so I, I don't think it's
that different in my view.
Uh, but, uh, just take it one step further in terms of,
it's slightly off your question, but would our sport
and would Pomona a friend, the social agency
that I represent, be impacted by the loss of funding?
Should online casinos not be required to return to community
and cannibalize class four gaming?
Absolutely. Yes. Yes.
We would be, we, we don't sit in the space of being able to,
to draw huge amounts of commercial return in the way some
of the big sports can because of their brand value.
We sit in the community space,
community brand value is not quite as sexy
as all black brand value or, you know, the top end of of it.
And that's not having a crack at anyone in particular,
just a, it's a fact of life.
It just is what it is. So, you know, we are,
we are probably, I don't know, one fifth reliant, you know,
in terms of our revenue on it.
So it makes it relatively, um, significant.
Um, you know,
all organizations at the moment are struggling for money.
Um, you know, we've just completing a restructure at the
moment, losing people, you know, we're to lose more money,
we lose more people, you know,
and then you start to undermine the ability to deliver,
you know, um, then you're having a whole different
conversation who is gambling?
You know, is it bad or possibly,
but you know, it is creating some good over here
by funding some really good outcomes.
So it's that balance. Hmm. Thank you.
I'm sorry, did I get off the question a little bit? No, no.
Final question to Lamon,
just really quickly going back to what you said earlier.
Mm-hmm. So with the land-based casinos, you've got more
of a system in place to sort
of pick up the behavior when someone's been,
and it turns into problem gambling.
And the other issue is, uh,
you talked about it having a screen,
but the issue is around the accessibility.
So if, if
with the online it's almost like 24, 24 7 access for
specifically young people, a lot
of them would probably be from your cohort they touch.
Yep. Um, so there is that impact that only some submitters,
um, talked about,
but the impact of funding, would that be an issue,
do you think, sort of looking into the crystal ball,
that would be, that could be an issue for young,
your younger players if they had the accessibility?
Um, so onsite venues
close at a certain time.
Yes. Online never closes. No.
So there's, again,
you can draw your own conclusions from that.
Um, it's, again, I,
I don't look at it from the perspective of our players
or participants particularly,
I look at it on the whanau impact.
So our sport is very whanau oriented.
You know, Maori Pacifica are heavily
represented within our sport.
Um, and so we have a very whanau approach to everything,
and we are looking at it from the perspective of both,
you know, if gambling is harmful, it's harmful to the whanau
as a collective, not just the individual.
And even if it is an individual that's causing all the harm,
it still impacts on the whole whanau.
Um, you know, so from
that perspective we look at it in a slightly different way.
So I hope that answers your question
to an extent. Good. Yeah.
Thank you. Thank you so much. We are
at time slightly over.
So thank you very much, um, for your submission today
and for answering our questions. We appreciate it.
No problem. I've enjoyed it. Thank you very much.
Thank you. We enjoyed having you. Thank you.
Our last minute for today is welling New Zealand.
That's Simon, Justin Wickham. Welcome.
Thank you. Good afternoon.
We've got, uh, 10 minutes for your submission
and um, if you want, you can leave
some time for questions at the end.
And thank you. Thank you for
being our last senator of today.
Sure. Yes. And uh, and thanks for the opportunity.
Really appreciate it. Um, as two speakers
before we spoke, uh, to a number of the, uh,
key points in the submission from the sporting collective,
I think it'd just be fair to say that we align with those,
uh, and with a number of the, uh,
and I can see from the, um, responses you've got,
you've had an overwhelming number
of submissions from the sporting set this, so, uh,
I'll take it as read the submission for your sake.
Um, what I would like to spend a little bit of time
with you today is just reinforcing with you
that the last time as a country,
I think we contemplated a licensed operator
framework in New Zealand.
Um, for gambling.
We created a model that's become a really powerful tool for
enabling community returns from commercial gaming activity,
uh, whilst being mindful of harm minimization.
And I think we're on the cusp of really being able to take
that opportunity again.
Um, I don't know
that we're ever gonna stop gambling in New Zealand.
I don't know that we're ever gonna stop harm minimization,
uh, dunno that we're ever gonna stop
gambling harm in New Zealand.
Um, but certainly we created a very good model, I believe,
and I've talked to my background, um,
for balancing community returns
and community harm, um, in, in an environment that has got,
uh, societies or,
or, uh, gaming institutions, uh, foundations,
particularly class four gaming foundations, um, that have
to be mindful of all those things through legislation.
Um, well, well governed, um,
and well managed, I think with regards to some of,
certainly some of the, the better
of the foundations that we've worked with.
Um, my personal background, just
to give you a short history, um,
I've been on both the revenue generation side of gaming, um,
as CEO of a company that operated a number
of hospitality venues, uh, some of which, uh,
housed Class four gaming within those venues.
Uh, and equally I've been on the recipient side of gaming,
uh, both in my current role as CEO of rowing New Zealand,
but also former CEO of yachting New Zealand.
Um, a volunteer ski patroller in a very small club field up
on the side of Rupe, who that enables.
Um, uh, you know, the, the provision of a sport
that is costly like rowing, skiing's the same, uh,
at lesser cost thanks to, um, gaming society, uh, support,
um, a former board member of the Olympic Committee,
which worked with every sport in the country,
and also a former, um, chair of Gym Sports New Zealand,
so a number of different sporting backgrounds
and at a really personal sort of club level, um, you know,
managed and coached and, uh, supported a number
of teams in a number of sports, basketball, football,
hockey, the list goes on.
Um, so I guess you could say I've been both, um,
on the gamekeeper and the poacher side of the, of, uh,
class four gaming over the years and,
and I think the support
of gaming funding towards rowing in New Zealand.
If I look at my current role in the sports, uh, clubs
and schools that, um, uh, sit underneath our umbrella,
what it has helped enable is New Zealand, um,
particularly more so than some other nations to be our sport
to be more accessible to a wider range of people.
Um, so unlike some nations, um, around the world,
um, rowing in New Zealand is not the sole domain
of private schools and or elite sporting clubs.
Um, and I do think that, uh, you know, funds from gaming
and community return has actually been a significant
contributor to that.
It's not a cheap sport.
Um, it's an equipment intensive sport.
It involves water safety and coach boats and,
and rowing skiffs.
Um, they're typically owned by clubs
or schools, uh, not individuals.
Um, and, and class full gaming's been, uh,
instrumental in supporting that, uh,
and those fleets of boats that then enable people
to participate and come and take part, whether
or not you can afford a boat yourself or not.
Um, I think this bill has got the opportunity
to set up an online gaming, um, framework for New Zealand,
um, using that existing, uh, model as a success story to try
and replicate again.
Um, our recommendation is that, um,
government looks at working
with the current gaming societies
and looks at that Class four model, um, simply, um,
because it's working, uh, and
because I believe past behavior is a fantastic
indicator of future behavior.
And, and I would put to you that, uh, many
of the best class four gaming operators, um, have
embraced the 40% levy
and have shifted that figure upwards of 40%, um,
and, and have embraced the need to give back to community.
And for those submitters that may argue to you
that if you do that in the online space, whether it's at 40%
or some other lesser percentage, um, for those that argue
for no percentage, I would say to you they are probably, uh,
not interested in giving back to this community as compared
to those submitters that are arguing for, um, a license
with a community payback.
Um, the best of class four providers, um,
grassroots foundations when we work very closely
with IT rowing, um, do provide a really sound basis
for enabling that to happen.
Um, and I think that they, they could continue, those sorts
of operators could continue
to give back a significant proportion of gaming proceeds
to the community, whether it was an online or offline space.
And so I urge you to sort of, um, consider
that in your deliberations going forward, um, with regards
to those, the current structure we've got
and how we best support that
because it has made an enormous
contribution towards community.
And I think it, as the previous speakers have said,
you know, it is at risk of both eroding that,
but also at risk of missing an opportunity, uh, to create
that again in a new form of gaming in New Zealand.
Thank you. Check with colleagues if they've got questions.
Um, I just have a question around the, um,
proposal about having 40%, um,
returned from online gambling.
Um, if it was, and I, I don't, um, know what the minister
or the government might be considering,
but if that was higher
or lower, what, what impact do you think that
that would have in terms of, um, uh, the, the way that,
um, that funding is provided?
Is there, is there any, is 40% an arbitrary figure
to match it or is there a reason that that,
that they should be the same?
Uh, I think the argument
for the same is a level playing field.
Um, but I think you'd, you know, you'd have to work closely
with gaming providers to understand the, um, the provision
of online gaming and is the cost greater or smaller?
Um, at the moment, there's a, there's a list of, uh,
I guess, you know, compliance
and operating costs that class four meet
and meet a 40% requirement.
Um, I'm not sure I'm, you know,
I'm not an expert in online gaming
and the structures behind it.
Um, but certainly if I think back
to the class four operations that we ran there, there is a,
a significant cost around running class four that may
or may not be there for online.
Um, but had, I would suggest
that had the legislation not imposed a 40%, uh,
payback levy on that, um, on that uh, operation,
um, it's highly unlikely that
that might have been met by itself.
And the best example of
that in the online world I'd give you is
how many online current operators in other nations are
giving back a significant percentage of gross profit
to their communities right now.
Um, my suggestion would be,
without some legislative requirement
for it, it won't happen.
And we'll miss an opportunity, uh, in this country.
Thank you so much. Thank you.
Appreciate you coming in and I think you might actually be
our last submitter, um,
throughout the whole entire process.
So thank you for, um, for ending on that point. Thank
You for the opportunity. Thank you.
Thank you so much.